---
Pr-id: Publications 
P-id: 'Knowledge Mile series'
A-id: 3  

Item-id: 'unique no.' 

Authors: 'Cristina Ampatzidou, Matthijs Bouw, Froukje van de Klundert, Michiel de Lange, Martijn de Waal' 


Abstract: 'The Hackable City is an on-going research project on the role of digital media in the process of citymaking that resulted from cooperation between One Architecture and The Mobile City Foundation. The project investigates the opportunities of digital media technologies for the empowerment of citizens and other stakeholders in a democratic process of citymaking. It also explores the shift in roles of and relationships between governments, (design) professionals and citizens in this process.'

Keywords: 'citymaking, empowerment, developments, Amsterdam, citizens'

Rights: 'This publication is licensed under Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0)'

---

# The Hackable City

In a hackable city, new media technologies are employed to open up urban
institutions and infrastructures to systemic change in the public interest. It
combines top-down smart-city technologies with bottom-up ‘smart citizen’
initiatives.
The Hackable City is a research project on the role of digital media in the process
of citymaking that resulted from cooperation between One Architecture
and The Mobile City Foundation. The project investigates the opportunities of
digital media technologies for the empowerment of citizens and other stakeholders
in a democratic process of citymaking.
The Hackable City aims to offer a closer look at the implications of ‘hackable
city making’ in the form of a Hackable City Research Manifesto and a ‘hackable
city toolkit’. This toolkit could give designers, policy makers and citizens
a number of ideas to approach projects that they might be working on, providing
also a number of strategies to include in their projects.

**Cristina Ampatzidou** (University of Amsterdam / University of Groningen)

**Matthijs Bouw** (Researcher, One Architecture)

**Froukje van de Klundert** (Embedded Researcher, University of Amsterdam)

**Michiel de Lange** (Researcher, Utrecht University)

**Martijn de Waal** (Project leader, University of Amsterdam / Amsterdam University
of Applied Sciences)

# The Hackable City: A Research Manifesto and Design Toolkit
    

### Cristina Ampatzidou
### Matthijs Bouw
### Froukje van de Klundert
### Michiel de Lange
### Martijn de Waal 

# Colophon 

Cristina Ampatzidou, Matthijs Bouw, Froukje van de Klundert, Michiel de Lange, Martijn de Waal 

The Hackable City: A Research Manifesto and Design Toolkit

**Design** UNDOG, Amsterdam

**EPUB development** Jess van Zyl (PublishingLab)

**Copy-editor** Russell Kinch

**Printer** Offsetdrukkerij Nuance, Zaandam

**Publisher** Amsterdam Creative Industries Publishing, Rose Leighton

**Supported by** Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences (Hogeschool van
Amsterdam), PublishingLab

**Cover image** Marc Faasse <a href="http://www.ndsm.nl/speeltuin">www.ndsm.nl/speeltuin</a>

**Photography** Marc Faasse, Michiel de Lange, Pink Pony Express

**Diagrams** Juliette Sung

**Contact** Amsterdam Creative Industries Publishing,
<a href="http://www.amsterdamcreativeindustries.com/">www.amsterdamcreativeindustries.com</a>

EPUB and PDF editions of this publication are freely downloadable from
our website, <a href="http://www.publishinglab.nl/publications">www.publishinglab.nl/publications</a>

This publication is licensed under Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0)

Amsterdam, December 2015

**ISBN** 978-94-92171-04-7 (print)

**ISBN** 978-94-92171-05-4 (ePub)

![](images/logos/Universiteit-van-Amsterdam-black.png)
![](images/logos/logo_KnowledgeMile.png)
![](images/logos/Hogeschool-van-Amsterdam-black.png)
![](images/logos/One-Architecture-black.png)
![](images/logos/Ministerie-van-Binnenlandse-Zaken-black.png)
![](images/logos/Pakhuis-de-Zwijger-black.png)
![](images/logos/Universiteit_Utrecht-black.png)
![](images/logos/the-mobile-city.png)
![](images/logos/logo_publishinglab.png)
![](images/logos/logo_ACICE.png)


# Contents

<a href="ch007.xhtml">Introduction: the Rise of the Platform Society</a>

<a href="ch008.xhtml">A Hackable City Research Manifesto</a>

<a href="ch009.xhtml">The Hackable City Toolkit</a>

<a href="ch010.xhtml">Case Studies</a>

<a href="ch011.xhtml">Further Thoughts</a>

#Acknowledgements
![](imgs/HvA_HackableCities_breaker1.png)
&nbsp;

The Hackable City is a research project on the role of digital
media in the process of citymaking that resulted from cooperation
between One Architecture and The Mobile City Foundation. The project
investigates the opportunities of digital media technologies for the
empowerment of citizens and other stakeholders in a democratic process
of citymaking. It also explores the shift in roles of and relationships
between governments, (design) professionals and citizens in this
process.

The first contours for this project were laid out by One Architecture
and The Mobile City during the Metropool NL workshop organized by the
Deltametropool Society in 2012, resulting in the publication *Eindhoven,
Hackable World City*. This was followed by an ‘embedded researcher’
project hosted at the University of Amsterdam and One Architecture and
funded by the Creative Industries Research Centre Amsterdam, with
contributions from Utrecht University. In 2014, funding was received
from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) for both
a KIEM-exploration through Utrecht University and a Creative Industries
research project hosted at the University of Amsterdam (UvA), The Amsterdam
University of Applied Sciences (AUAS), and One Architecture. For the
latter, new partners joined the research coalition: The Ministry of the
Interior and Kingdom Relations, Pakhuis de Zwijger, and Buiksloterham.

Current Research Team: Matthijs Bouw (Researcher, Director One Architecture); Tara Karpinski (Embedded Researcher, University of Amsterdam & One Architecture);
Froukje van de Klundert (Embedded Researcher, University of Amsterdam); Michiel de Lange (Researcher, Utrecht University);
Karel Millenaar (Designer, AUAS); Martijn de Waal (Project leader, UvA /
AUAS)

Interns: Melvin Sidarta (Research) & Juliette Sung (Visual
Communication)

[www.thehackablecity.nl](http://www.thehackablecity.nl/)

<a href="mailto:info@thehackablecity.nl">info@thehackablecity.nl</a>

![](images/1_colofon_cover.png)

# Definitions

**The Hackable City** (normative definition):

In a hackable city, new media technologies are employed to open up urban
institutions and infrastructures to systemic change in the public
interest. It combines top-down smart-city technologies with bottom-up
‘smart citizen’ initiatives.

In a hackable city, the urban (data) infrastructure functions as a
platform that can be appropriated and incrementally improved upon by
various stakeholders.

**The Hackable City** (research project):

The goal of this research project is to explore the opportunities as
well as challenges of the rise of new media technologies for an open,
democratic process of collaborative citymaking. How can citizens, design
professionals, local government institutions and others employ digital
media platforms in collaborative processes of urban planning, management
and social organization, to contribute to a liveable and resilient city,
with a strong social fabric?

![Figure 1: Citymaking](images/2citymaking.png)


# Introduction: the rise of the platform society

![](imgs/HvA_HackableCities_breaker2.png)
&nbsp;

For citymakers all around the world, we live in interesting times, full
of paradoxes. Whereas local governments are teaming up with technology
companies to make their cities ‘smarter’ and turn them into living labs,
citizen initiatives all over the world have started to emerge bottom-up
around numerous issues, from collective neighborhood gardens to energy
cooperatives. On the one hand, technology enthusiasts and entrepreneurs
sing the praise of innovative approaches to transit, ranging from Uber
to the advent of the driverless car. On the other, newspaper columns are
filled with critical op-ed contributions addressing the negative
consequences of the so-called sharing economy, varying from increasing
pressure on already tight housing markets to subpar working conditions
for those employed in the on-demand economy. Finally, while personalized
services such as Google Maps, local restaurant review sites and sporting
apps possibly provoke a shift towards a more individualistic experience
of the city, a young generation of architects and designers is employing
a series of digital platforms to crowdfund and crowdsource projects that
are to revitalize public space, to contribute to a circular economy, or
to build local communities or jumpstart a civic economy.

What binds these examples together is that they are part of an
underlying shift in the organization of our societies, a shift that we
could call ‘the rise of the platform society’ – a society in which more
and more of our social and economic interactions are mediated through
digital media platforms. Whether it’s finding a taxi through Uber,
arranging a date through Tinder, connecting with neighborhood-dwellers
to collectively start a solar energy initiative or searching for
fellow-enthusiasts to turn parking places into ‘parklets’ (small parks
the size of a parking place), it seems that, as a current
tech-commercial claimed: *there’s an app for that*. Or at least a
neighborhood blog, an Instructable-video, an online forum, a
crowdsourcing tool, a social network, or any other kind of digital media
platform that connects supply and demand in a broad variety of societal
domains through its software.

This growing use of digital media platforms in our everyday urban
culture has great consequences for what we call citymaking: the ways in
which a broad variety of actors decide upon, design, program, manage and
appropriate the physical city and its social life. To put it in the
terminology of this research project: in the platform society it may
become easier to ‘hack’ the existing fabric of our cities and
appropriate it for our own uses, whether it’s temporarily converting our
apartment into a hotel, or mobilizing ‘friends’ at a public park - whether it’s for a communal bbq, a political rally or a riot against the powers that be. As a consequence, we may make use of
our urban infrastructures in more efficient ways and find more flexible
ways to program our cities, mobilize crowds, organize communities,
activate places and negotiate transactions.

<div class="streams"><hr class="streams" />
In the platform society it may become easier
to ‘hack’ the existing fabric of our cities and appropriate it for our own uses<hr class="streams" /></div>

Following the sometimes positivist swing to the rhetoric of the platform
society, the connections these new platforms forge may empower citizens
in new ways to organize themselves around all kind of issues, bringing
about a sharing economy, a participation society or a civic economy.
Yet, such a future is far from assured. As critics have pointed out,
these very same developments – sometimes sold under the guise of the
smart city - may also threaten to subsume all social relations under the
functionalist and commercial ‘city as a service’ logic of technology
companies, leading to an increase in inequality and the further advent
of technocratic urban governance.

##Hackable City Opportunities & Challenges

This publication, consisting of a ‘Hackable City Research Manifesto‘ and
a ‘Hackable City Toolkit’, aims to offer an inroad to grasp these
developments as well as a practical guide to act upon them. What
opportunities, as well as challenges, does the rise of the platform
society pose for an open, democratic process of collaborative
citymaking? And how can citizens, design professionals, local government
institutions and others creatively use digital media platforms in
collaborative processes of urban planning, management and social
organization, to contribute to a liveable and resilient city, with a
strong social fabric?

These are of course big questions that do not allow for easy answers.
Yet in the end it’s these very questions that need to be addressed. What
we propose is an iterative step-by-step approach, to explore the
challenges and opportunities digital media afford for citymaking, and
this report is our first iteration of this process.

To address our research questions, we have taken on the metaphor of
hacking - which could be defined as the playful and clever appropriation
of a system through a learning-by-doing approach, in a spirit of sharing
and collaboration. We think this notion of hacking is a productive way
to approach the process of citymaking in the era of the platform
society. As it is a term derived from the world of computers and
software, ‘hacking’ foregrounds the use of digital media platforms in
the process. The notion of ‘hacking’, in the sense of ‘opening up a
system’, connects with broader societal trends such as the rise of a
civic or sharing economy, approaches of open innovation and
collaborative planning, discussions about civic participation and the
changing roles between experts and amateurs. How can we use these
technologies to ‘hack’ (appropriate, adjust, extend, improve) the
social, cultural and economic processes in our cities, from the
perspective of the public interest?

As hacking addresses both the practices of the hacker as well as the
logic of the system to be hacked, it also provides ways to overcome the
current antagonism between top-down smart city developments (usually
focussing on the system rather than its users) and bottom-up smart
citizen initiatives (often focussing on the organization of citizens,
sometimes overlooking its consequences for society as a whole). As such,
the term also opens up a normative discussion that is of importance for
designers, policy makers and citizens alike. To what extent can and
should a city be ‘hackable’? To whose advantage is a hackable city to be
appropriated? How can we safeguard a public interest perspective when
opening up the city for appropriation by a broad variety of actors? And
how can we prevent criminal or socially destructive attempts to hack the
city?

These last questions are important. As hacking also has a negative
connotation, the use of this term also foregrounds the risks of the
platform society. Whereas we use a positive definition of hacking, based
on collaboration towards communal goals, hacking can also refer to
criminals breaking into systems, stealing people’s credit card numbers,
endangering their privacy, or even bringing down vital computer systems
by malicious attacks. Each technology can be used for contrarian
purposes, and digital media platforms by their very nature are
vulnerable to such attacks. Whereas in this study we are interested in
the opportunities the platform society offers for more resilient,
sustainable and sociable urban futures, the use of the very term hacking
implies that design of such systems must always take these
counter-attacks in mind. Privacy and safety of systems should not be an
afterthought, but at the very heart of thinking about hackable cities.

As a last note, the verb hacking can also be understood as shorthand for
a practical approach to solving complex issues. Hackers don’t sit down
to endlessly theorize, they just start patching up any problem with the
means they happen to have at hand. Hacking is an iterative,
learning-by-doing kind of process.

This research project follows a similar approach. Our manifesto and
toolkit should be understood as a first probe, a beta-version, of our
work in progress; work that may never be completely finished as
technologies and conditions are continuously being updated as well. In
the spirit of the hacker community: we nevertheless find it productive
to share what we have put together so far, in the hope to spark a
discussion and help others forward their research and design endeavours.

We will go about this as follows: In part I we will have a closer look
at the implications of ‘hackable city making’ in the form of a Hackable
City Research Manifesto. The goal of this Manifesto is to point out the
main challenges and opportunities for a democratic process of citymaking
in the emerging platform society. What new questions and approaches
arise when we look at the process of citymaking through the lens of
hackable city making? The manifesto is structured around eight Hackable
City Research Questions, each of them addressing a particular aspect of
the application of digital media technologies in the process of
citymaking.

In part II we turn to the praxis of citymaking and exhibit a first
‘beta-version’ of a ‘hackable city toolkit’. This toolkit could give
designers, policy makers and citizens a number of ideas to approach
projects that they might be working on, providing also a number of
strategies to include in their projects. Learning from existing
examples, we have identified a model that consists of seven phases that
are addressed in the process of hackable citymaking. Furthermore, we
have assembled the approaches we found in these phases into a toolkit of
strategies. These tools will be further specified in the extensive
descriptions of seven hackable city projects.

We hope that the Hackable City Research Manifesto in combination with
the Hackable City Toolkit will give designers and community organizers
(be they professionals or citizens themselves) a starting point to think
about organizing their interventions, both from a philosophical and
strategic as well as from a hands-on perspective. In a true
hacker-approach, this toolkit should not be understood as an exhaustive
or even prescriptive list, but as an inventory that may be hacked
itself, and we welcome additions or alterations.

In the final chapter, we will conclude with a number of general
reflections on the process of hackable citymaking. What points of
further developing ‘hackable city making’ need our attention, both in
research, design and policy?

# A Hackable City Research Manifesto

![](imgs/HvA_HackableCities_breaker3.png)
&nbsp;

We have found the notion of hackability a useful lens to approach the
increasing role of digital media in our urban societies, as well as to
reflect on the changing relations between various parties in the process
of citymaking. When looking at our cities through the lens of ‘hacking’,
specific issues in the process of citymaking that need to be addressed
suddenly become visible. At the same time, the ethos found in hacker
communities that operate in the world of computers and software may give
us interesting leads for the design and application of digital media
platforms that contribute to open-ended, democratic and inclusive
practices of citymaking.

To start our inquiry: as it is a term normally associated with the world
of computers and software, the notion of hacking foregrounds the
increasing role of software in our urban societies. As hacking can also
mean ‘breaking into systems’ or ‘bending the logic of systems’, it also
questions the openness of digital media platforms, and ultimately the
cities they serve. To what extents can the logic of digital media
platforms be bent or opened up for unforeseen purposes?

This is an important issue. After all, cities themselves have long been
theorized as platforms, or ‘market places’ that in their various public,
institutional and even private spaces connect supply and demand in
numerous spheres. As Manuel Castells has argued, cities can be
understood as material interfaces that connect individual city dwellers
with collective practices, experiences and rhythms (Castells, 2002). In
addition, it could be argued that the success of cities as economic and
cultural systems has always depended on their ‘hackability’, or the ways
in which their systematic workings can be (playfully) appropriated by
its residents. That is: the force of cities is that they have been open
systems whose infrastructure and overlapping social, cultural and
economic networks can be put to use in new, unforeseen ways by a variety
of actors. They are open platforms whose infrastructure and programme
allow their residents to forge all kinds of linkages between them,
contributing to both economic and cultural innovation as well as mutual
trust between citizens. And although these activities are usually
confined by what current laws allow for, cities have always remained
open platforms where these laws can be challenged as well; be it through
small scale tactical interventions or large revolutionary protest
demonstrations.

<div class="streams"><hr class="streams" />
The force of cities is that they have been open systems whose infrastructure and
overlapping social, cultural and economic networks can be put to use in new, unforeseen
ways by a variety of actors<hr class="streams" /></div>

What happens to these functions of the city now that in our everyday
urban lives, we have started to make use of all kinds of digital
interfaces to join supply and demand and to match individuals with
collectives? Now that links are no longer forged by the overlapping
spatial and social circuits of our everyday lives but through the
algorithms of digital media platforms? Could this indeed empower
citizens to organize themselves around all kinds of issues, forging new
links and connections? Or, is it that, as other critics point out, these
very same developments may also threaten to subsume all social relations
under the commercial ‘city as a service’- logic of technology companies
that build the platforms through which our cities are organized? As some
have pointed out, many current ‘smart city’ visions focus on the
development of (usually) proprietary platforms that are to make the city
more efficient. Among the issues that smart city policies seek to
address are mobility, clean energy, water and food production and
distribution, health, living and public participation (Hollands, 2008).
Whereas that in itself could be a positive force, many of these visions
have received wide criticism (see for example: Greenfield, 2013;
Hemment & Townsend, 2013). By and large these criticisms have focussed
on the ill-defined notion of “smartness” in smart city visions, targeted
the simplified view of what cities actually are, and attacked their
apolitical technocratic nature (see also Allwinkle & Cruickshank, 2011;
Gabrys, 2014; Kitchin, 2013; Ratti & Townsend, 2011; Söderström,
Paasche, & Klauser, 2014).

What does “smart” mean and who are actually supposed to be smart? Is
city life and the urban experience about control, efficiency and
predictability, or about encountering the unexpected and dealing with
differences? Moreover, smart city views propose “technological fixes” to
complex problems. Many so-called “smart technologies” or smart
interventions are implicitly driven by a logic of consumption, control,
and capsularization but do not empower citizens to become active players
in their cities (de Lange & de Waal, 2013; Levy, 2001). The push for
safety with CCTV and smart risk assessing algorithms could turn cities
into places of pervasive control and surveillance. Smart retail
solutions, location-based services and predictive algorithms push a
consumerist view of urban life. And personal mobile technologies may
foster a culture of capsularization and retreat. When technology-driven
solutions ignore active contributions of citizens they may have adverse
effects for urban public life at large.

The least that can be said in conclusion to these criticisms is that the
software and interfaces of digital media platforms are not neutral tools
for ‘hacking the city’. They are an active actor, whose workings and
design may reflect particular power structures or offer opportunities to
revert these. Therefore, their logic should be understood by all parties
involved in the process of citymaking, be they local governments,
citizens or designers. Can citizens and other actors still hack into
these systems, becomes an important question. To what extent do our
cities remain the open systems that provided their success?

<div class="RQ">
  Hackable City Research Question 1: <p>How can we safeguard the open character of our cities in the platform society?</p>
</div>

## A brief history of hacker culture

The notion of ‘hacking’, or more precisely the hacker ethos found
amongst a variety of tech- and computer-based subcultures labelled as
such in the last half a century or so, may provide an answer to this
first Hackable City Research Question. We argue that some of the values
from these – by no means singular – subcultures could help us think
about designing digital media platforms for ‘open cities’. Or at least
raise a set of relevant questions and issues to be tackled in the
process. A somewhat closer look at this hacker’s ethos will help to
address these issues in relation to the process of citymaking in the
platform society.

The set of principles, practices and associated ethics labelled as
“hacking” has long been part and parcel of the world of media
technologies. We find it amongst the radio-amateurs who in the 1910s and
20s hacked together their own crystal set receivers and discussed both
the workings of the technological systems themselves as well as societal
issues through the airwaves in a practice they called ‘Citizen Radio’
(Barlow, 1988). We come across it at the dawn of the 1960s at the labs
of the Massachusetts Institute for Technology in Cambridge, where
teenagers and undergraduates started tinkering with the newly built
giant supercomputer TX-0. Officially designed for defence and research
purposes and operated by a closed priest-like class of experts, this
expensive machine was now appropriated by the playful explorations of
these young outsiders, driven by their curiosity about what such a
machine could do. They even designed their own games – upsetting the air
of seriousness that had surrounded computers until then.

<div class="streams"><hr class="streams" />Until then, they claimed, computers had mainly been associated with the oppressive workings of a centralized government<hr class="streams" /></div>

We stumble again upon a hacking ethos in the 1970s, when in the San
Francisco Bay Area under the umbrella of the Homebrew Computer Club, a
groups of geeks – that later would found tech companies such as Apple -
started to build their own computers as an act of political rebellion.
Until then, they claimed, computers had mainly been associated with the
oppressive workings of a centralized government. Now, they aspired,
these same technologies could be used for personal liberation and
self-organization, along the line of the hippie era zeitgeist of
collaborative self-sufficiency reflected in publications like The Whole
Earth Catalogue (Levy, 2001; Turner, 2006).

In the 1980s, ‘hacking’ receives a negative connotation in society at
large, when it’s associated with criminals who break into computer
systems. Films like WarGames (1983), Blade Runner (1982), Tron (1982)
and books like Neuromancer (1984) bring this image of the underground
semi-criminal hacker into the domain of popular culture, demonstrating
the vulnerable aspects of large technological systems. In the 1990s, the
hacking community finds itself rehabilitated, as ‘hacking’ gains broader
cultural leverage as a label under which open source programmers have
started to collaboratively work on free software such as the operating
system Linux, the web browser Mosaic or the online publishing tool
Wordpress. Here hacking is interpreted as contributing one’s knowledge
and mastery over computer systems to the development of software for a
common good, while at the same time showing off one’s cleverness to do
so to a group of peers.

More recently in our current decade, the term hacking has popped up in a
similar way to describe a group of people who use computers, digital
media and the internet in an effort to shape urban life from the
bottom-up. In the introduction of his much-cited book on Smart Cities,
Anthony Townsend describes the emergence of the ‘civic hacker’ as
follows:

> “They eschew efficiency, instead seeking to amplify and accelerate the
> natural sociability of city life. Instead of stockpiling big data,
> they build mechanisms to share it with others. Instead of optimizing
> government operations behind the scenes, they create digital
> interfaces for people to see, touch, and feel the city in completely
> new ways. Instead of proprietary monopolies, they build collaborative
> networks. These bottom-up efforts thrive on their small scale but hold
> the potential to spread virally on the Web. Everywhere that the
> industry attempts to impose its vision of clean computer centrally
> managed order, they propose messy decentralized and democratic
> alternatives.” (Townsend, 2013)

Townsend’s description is not only the latest instalment of a
description of historic hacker cultures, it also brings together many of
the characteristics found in the various examples in a neat list of
characteristics: hackers are not mere users of technology, but active
creators, shapers, and benders of media technologies as well as the
relationships mediated through them (see also: Levy, 2001; Roszak,
1986). They like to tinker with technology, cooperate on projects for a common good and prefer messy
iterative operations above master plans. Hacking, in other words, refers
to the process of clever or playful appropriation of existing
technologies or infrastructures, and bending the operation of a
particular system beyond its intended purposes or restrictions to serve
personal or communal goals.

<div class="streams"><hr class="streams" />
Hackers are not mere users of technology, but active creators, shapers,
and benders of media technologies
<hr class="streams" /></div>

For hackers, that approach is not just one out of many ways to solve a
problem. For many of them it's a way of life. Many of the proponents in
the examples given above wilfully make use of the term hacker as a
communal badge of identity. To be a hacker not only means to playfully
make use of systems beyond their intended logic, it encompasses a
complete ethos: a particular way of understanding and operating in
society.

It’s the combination of these two aspects of hacking that we find
interesting vis-à-vis the development of a 21^st^ century collaborative
design approach for citymaking. ‘Hacking the city’ is about finding ways
to actively shape one’s surroundings through the clever and playful
appropriation of technology. And it could also be considered as a
communal identity, a collective approach to citymaking that borrows a
number of central tenets of the hacker culture. Although it would be
naïve to consider the hacker community as a coherent whole, from which
we could distil a single, consistent ethic, there are two central themes
in the hacker ethic that for us are of particular interest: a culture of
sharing and collaboration, and a tinkering, hands-on way to
problem-solving.

## Hackers’ stance on information: it wants to be free

The first point is the attitude of hackers towards openness and sharing
knowledge. If there’s one central principle that runs through various
accounts of hacker culture, it is unobstructed access to information (in
the form of code) in combination to the freedom to build upon other
people’s work. ‘Information wants to be free’ is one of the leading
adagios of hacker culture, although there is a controversy about how
exactly that should be interpreted. In the 1980s, open
software-evangelist Richard Stallman added an important nuance to this
claim: ‘Think free as in free speech, not free beer.’ Free to him did
not mean that all information would be accessible without any costs, but
that users had the freedom to build upon, alter, change or hack into
existing information structures. Such a freedom to information could
lead to innovation, and thus contribute to a better world. As such the
hacker ethic opposes the closed knowledge systems of patents and
proprietary platforms. The more information is available, the better. As
Stallman stated:

> “I believe that all generally useful information should be free. By
> 'free' I am not referring to price, but rather to the freedom to copy
> the information and to adapt it to one's own uses... When information
> is generally useful, redistributing it makes humanity wealthier no
> matter who is distributing and no matter who is receiving.” (Stallman,
> quoted in: Denning, 1996)

The openness of systems has another advantage. In his seminal essay ‘The
Cathedral and the Bazaar’ Eric Raymond (1999), one of the gurus
of the open source software movement, explains the decentralized
hacker-approach of being small and agile. It’s that very ethic of
small-scale initiatives in combination with cooperation with one’s
neighbours that allows the bazaar to respond to needs as they emerge.
That is in contrast to the cathedral, which according to Raymond
articulates the vision of a master builder, slowly becoming a
masterpiece to dominate the urban landscape, yet tied to its original
function and unable to adjust to changing circumstances. For Raymond, as
for Stallman, not collaborating with peers in developing software was
not an option. Now how can new media technologies assist to port this
approach of openness, collaborative learning and cooperation from online
projects – varying from Wikipedia to open source software – to the
process of citymaking? That’s one of the leading questions we will try
to address in the Hackable City Toolkit further on in this publication.

<div class="RQ">
  Hackable City Research Question 2: <p>How can new media technologies assist to port the approaches of openness, collaborative learning and cooperation found in various instances of hacker culture – varying from Wikipedia to open source soft- and hardware – to the process of citymaking?</p>
</div>

## Hackers, Experts and Amateurs

The hacker ethic of sharing knowledge opens up another interesting
discussion: that of the shifting relation between experts, professionals
and citizens. The hacker is an interesting figure: he doesn’t belong to
a class of officially sanctioned or accredited experts, his knowledge is
usually self-taught, and his mode of operation not one of systematic
research moving from the formation of strategic plans to application,
but rather a more impromptu one of trial and error. As such he may be a
figurehead for a broader trend, that according to numerous sociologists
consists of a crisis in the ‘natural’ legitimacy of expert knowledge,
systems and professionals, that has started to develop in concurrence
with the period of late or high modernity that begins somewhere in the
early 1980s (see for example Beck, 1992). This so-called crisis touches
many domains - from politics to science to health care to journalism. It
also affects urban design, policy making and governance. There is now a
continual uncertainty and ongoing need to redefine the role of
professional disciplines across the board. There is, then, a need to
come up with reflections on and new narratives about the role of the
(former) expert in relation to the (professional) amateur (Leadbeater &
Miller, 2004).

In professional circles we have seen numerous answers to this trend. In
planning we have seen the rise of collaborative planning in which
planners have started to use digital tools to gather input from
stakeholders or the use of games to engage various stakeholders in the
process (Gordon & Manosevitch, 2010; Gordon, Schirra, & Hollander,
2011). In processes of ‘open innovation’ and ‘living labs’, procedures
have arisen in which citizens can act as co-creators in the design of
products or even their neighborhoods. Baccarne et. al. have described
these initiatives as evocative of a hacker ethic, as these living labs
‘promote the idea that anyone is capable of performing a variety of
tasks rather than relying on paid experts or specialists’ (Baccarne,
Mechant, Schuurma, De Marez, & Colpaert, 2014).

The point is not that expert-knowledge has no value anymore, or that
every amateur can take up any task. Rather, what these examples show is
that citymaking can be more inclusive if various forms of expertise–
from the highly technical to the everyday-life-experiences – can be
brought together in a system of open innovation. Or argued the other way
around: if the process of city-making is to be made hackable, citizens
have to become hackers, meaning that they should have ways to master the
knowledge and capacities needed. In a hackable city, urban design is
then not just about the design of grand schemes, but also about the
design of procedures and tools that can help citizens to contribute to
that. This could take various forms, from designing knowledge platforms
through which knowledge can be crowdsourced and exchanged, to providing
digital tools that can help non-professionals understand or intervene in
situations or the organization of capacity building campaigns that help
citizens master the skills needed to become active agents of change in
the platform society.

A new generation of Dutch architects has already started to embrace this
vision. In the book *Reactivate!* Indira van ‘t Klooster writes how a
series of offices have redefined their role. They have designed new
procedures of campaigning, crowdsourcing and crowdfunding to approach
citizens as co-creators, whereas they have started to see their role as
developers or producers of projects that address urgent societal issues,
organizing the knowledge and contributions of various stakeholders
around it (Van 't Klooster, 2013).

<div class="RQ">
  Hackable City Research Question 3: <p>What new procedures of knowledge exchange and capacity building are needed to make the hackable citymaking process an inclusive one?</p>
</div>

<div class="RQ">
  Hackable City Research Question 4: <p>How can digital media platforms be designed to organize various stakeholders around societal issues and give each stakeholder the opportunity to contribute to the best of their abilities?</p>
</div>

## Learning by doing

Another common trait in various hacker cultures of use to our
investigation of city making in the era of the platform society, is
hackers’ particular approach to innovation: one that consists of a messy
learning by doing attitude, based on an attitude of finding intrinsic
pleasure in tinkering, balancing pragmatic problem solving and
curiosity-driven problem seeking, and considering messiness as a
potential strength instead of a threat. A hacker is both a homo faber
and a homo ludens, as they tend to have a playful and curious world
outlook. They want to know how stuff works by tinkering with it; not as
engineers who design according to a carefully preconceived plan or
blueprint but in an improvising go-along way. Being a hacker entails a
slightly subversive attitude. Hackers do not accept defaults (“as is”)
but imaginatively enquire the space of potential (“what if”). In an
anecdote that illustrates this point, Levy describes the entrance of a
fourteen year old boy in the M.I.T lab who started to drive all the
theoretical researchers crazy. Where they were used to start building
complicated theorems to work from, he just started to play with the
computer to see what it could do.

> “They're theorizing all these things and I'm rolling up my sleeves and
> doing it . . . you find a lot of that in hacking in general. I wasn't
> approaching it from either a theoretical point of view or an
> engineering point of view, but from sort of a fun-ness point of view.”
> (Levy, 2001)

In recent years, this learning by doing has increasingly found its way
into the process of citymaking. In their book, *Tactical Urbanism,* Mike
Lydon and Anthony Garcia describe numerous examples of citizens,
designers, architects and even city governments who have just started to
try out small and temporary interventions in the urban fabric to see
whether they would be successful, rather than commissioning feasibility
studies or grand master plans. Whereas playfulness was often used as a
tactic to mobilize local stakeholders and potential users, recording
metrics about the consequences were often important in convincing
stakeholders of a more durable interpretation of the interventions
(Lydon & Garcia, 2015).

<div class="RQ">
  Hackable City Research Question 5: <p>How can we bring the iterative, learning-by-doing approach to the process of citymaking?</p>
</div>

## The commons: hacking for the public good?

Whereas the notion of a hackable city can bring an interesting
perspective to the process of citymaking, it can also be used to
problematize this process with digital media. The concept of the
hackable city is not a simple remedy that we can apply to our cities.
Rather, it’s a lens through which we can discuss issues related to the
use of digital media in citymaking. Again, the discussions in hacker
culture shed some interesting light on this. We want to highlight two
such discussions: one centered on the organization of a commons; the
second on governance models.

The first discussion revolves around the possible conflict between, or
alignment of, individual and communal rewards and the production of
commons-structured resources. Hacking, as we have seen, revolves around
the organization of creativity. As such, it both serves to scratch a
very personal itch (I don’t like the way something works so I’ll modify
it according to my wishes) and has a more social side to it (I’ve come
up with something clever and this could benefit others too). This social
side is competitive, for many hackers it’s about impressing and gaining
respect among peers through cleverness (for instance Levy, 2001: 12),
and at the same time it involves a communal attitude of openness,
sharing-alike and community building (Himanen, 2001; Hippel, 2005; Levy,
2001).

Some have argued that as a mode of production and organizing
communities, hacking can be positioned between the capitalist free
market economy and communitarian modes of production. In the former,
competition and individual profit reign supreme, as well as the
associated idea that corporations are the most suited to drive
innovation and well-being. The latter departs from ideals of
collectivizing and redistributing resources in an equal way. Himanen,
for instance, suggests that hacking, as part of a new ethics and spirit
of the network society, establishes a third way. Hackers reject the
typical capitalist mode of corporate innovation through competition
based on controlling information, and at the same time they reject the
centralized authority model associated with communism (Himanen, 2001).
Himanen’s empowered capitalist hacker is not motivated by money but does
not reject it, profit is understood in a much more complex system of
values comprized of creativity, passion, freedom, social worth,
activity, openness and caring.

Although the term is not much used in hacker culture per se, we find it
interesting to make a link to the model of the commons – the collective
development and management of communal resources, irrespectively of
property rights. The commons in medieval feudal England was the land
that belonged to a manor but on which the inhabitants of the estate had
certain rights, like collecting firewood, hunting or pasture. Later the
term was extended to include all resources to which a community has
rights upon. These resources could be natural as in the case of
pastureland and access to water or technological resources, as for
example TV and radio frequencies.

Interestingly, the word ‘common’ derives from the Norman word ‘commun’,
which itself has its roots in the Latin word ‘munus’, which combines the
meanings of “gift” and “duty”, stemming from the social obligation of
having to return a gift to the person that gave you one. The production
of open source software could be seen as an endeavour to develop a
communal resource in which various participants contribute their
knowledge and time to construct a tool that’s available for the
community at large. In his Hacker Manifesto, McKenzie Wark explicitly
calls for the safeguarding of an information commons, a shared pool of
resources free for all to use – and contribute to (Wark, 2004).

Can we think of the process of citymaking in similar terms? Where
citymakers work together to create and manage communal resources, not
for the sake of individual profit, but from a public interest
perspective? This perspective doesn’t mean that there shouldn’t be a
business model or that everyone involved should work for free as in
‘free beer’. It means that a business model should serve the public
interest rather than being a goal in itself.

<div class="streams"><hr class="streams" />How individuals can be rewarded for their contributions to a common good, is a central
question in hackable citymaking practices
<hr class="streams" /></div>

What’s of interest for our purposes here, is that there runs a thread
through hacker culture that combines the process of open learning with
one of collaboration and producing something for the community at large,
rather than just for personal profit. At the same time, the hacker ethic
is more libertarian (or even anarchistic) than communitarian. There
usually is also an individual motivation present to the participation in
collaborative projects, usually personal recognition rather than
monetary rewards. Although hackers like to share and engage in open
innovation, they do also care about individual reputation (Himanen,
2001). Using the analogy of hacking to describe processes of citymaking
highlights these tensions between the individual and the collective. How
individuals can be rewarded for their contributions to a common good, is
a central question in hackable citymaking practices.

Again, we have seen developments in this direction in current practices
of citymaking. In his *Compendium for the Civic Economy,* Joost
Beunderman provides an overview of numerous initiatives that have
started exploring new organization and business models to organize local
communities around issues of public interest (Beunderman, 2012).
Similarly, the British ‘innovation foundation’, Nesta, has published a
great overview of similar initiatives called Digital Social Innovation.
They see a European-wide rise of “collaborative methods for financing,
development and production, leading to services that are provided
neither by the state nor by the market” (Bria, 2015). Interesting as
these examples are, Nesta also sees a challenge here. While local and
small scale examples abound, it is still hard to scale these or find
room for further experimentation (Bria, 2015).

<div class="RQ">
  Hackable City Research Question 6: <p>How can we align, engage and reward various stakeholders around the organization of urban infrastructures or issues as a commons?</p>
</div>

## Hacking & Governance

A second discussion central to the hacker ethos revolves around the
organization model and governance of hackable city processes. As many
have pointed out: hackers distrust central authorities and prefer to
work in a decentralized way. As Voltaire would say: they mend their own
gardens. This leads to two potential challenges: a) the organization and
commitment within projects, and b) the relation between a collective
project and society at large.

To start with the first issue, some have argued that for the realization
of communal goals, the bottom-up approach may be too non-committal. Some
advocates of open source software such as Eric Raymond have therefore
argued for strong leadership. Successful examples of open source
software, he claimed, happened because of the benevolent dictators that
oversaw them, the production of the open source browser Netscape being
his central exhibit (Raymond, 1999). His argument reflects a wider
discussion on the role of centralized positions in horizontal
communities. This discussion also directly relates to the necessity of
institutions or other central agents that should have an overview and
guide processes, even when the processes themselves are open,
participatory and hackable. Some projects resolve this internally, but
in many projects, new roles may emerge for campaigners, community
organizers or civil institutions.

On a second level, conflicts may arise between the goals of a collective
practice of hackable citymaking, and the public interest at large. The
hackable city assumes a form of (civic) empowerment, giving agency to
the public to take initiative upon issues of their concern. At the same
time, it poses the question of democracy. How do new opportunities for
self-organization compare to institutional practices of democratic
decision making? In the framework of a hackable city, who secures that
the purposes of a self-organised group will not overshadow the interests
of the general public? Despite the charm of people joining forces to
inflict positive change in their environments, we must not forget that
these are also unsolicited actions that may be undemocratic.

The discussion on these possible conflicts of interests has recently
taken off. On the one hand national and city governments in The
Netherlands (and other countries as well) are enthusiastic about the
possible rise of a ‘participation society’ in which it’s no longer the
welfare state that takes care of all kinds of social provision, but
citizens who will organize themselves, start helping out each other. In
the ‘energetic society’ that the Netherlands Environmental Assessment
Agency sees emerging, the government is no longer the central director
determining both societal goals and the exact path to reach them, but
rather a producer that should capitalize on the energy of citizens,
organizations, companies and institutions. It should set a framework
that various actors then can take up (or ‘hack’) and fill in according
to their preferences and interests (Hajer, 2011). However, Tonkens,
Trappenburg, Hurenkamp and Schmidt have recently questioned this
approach. This approach may work out fine for the well-educated, but
leaves many others who lack the energy, the skills or the willingness to
participate in such a way behind (Tonkens, Trappenburg, Hurenkamp, &
Schmidt, 2015). Similarly, debates have emerged about the legitimacy of
citizen-initiatives. To what extent are they representative of the
citizenry as a whole? And to what extent are they expressions of private
collective interests rather than a public interest? How should local
governments relate to these initiatives?

These questions are hard to answer. But again, here the approach of hacking may help finding
solutions: rather than designing grand schemes of governance, now is a
time for experimenting with various frameworks and models of
representation, so we can learn from them.

<div class="RQ">
  Hackable City Research Question 7: <p>What governance frameworks can provide room for citizens and designers to legitimately hack their cities from the perspective of the public interest?</p>
</div>
<div class="RQ">
  Hackable City Research Question 8: <p>What new modes of inclusion and exclusion arise in the Hackable City? How can the Hackable City be both inclusive and at the same time provide room for differentiation?</p>
</div>

##Citizens and designers as social change agents

To conclude, for us a hackable city is a city that allows citizens or
designers to envision themselves as social change agents. That is: they
make use of digital tools to appropriate (‘hack’) one’s environment,
infrastructure or resources, not so much for personal gain, but rather
from the perspective of a common goal or collective interest.

This does not mean that all citizens should become city hackers. Not
every citizen has the time, means or interest to become a city hacker.
Rather it means that the city as a whole could profit if the system
could be opened up to those who see opportunities to hack it from a
public interest perspective.

Nor do we claim that planning as a professional discipline will become
obsolete. On the contrary, we think there always will be a role for
professional designers with their professional knowledge as well as for
civil institutions that use democratic procedures to the frameworks for
urban development. Rather we seek new ways to organize this process,
ways in which citizens, professionals and institutions work together in
a process we call citymaking.

We find the notion of the hackable city an interesting lens to discuss
the process of citymaking in the era of the platform society. As such
the term can be used to highlight critical or contrarian tactics, to
point to new collaborative practices amongst citizens mediated through
social media, or to describe a changing vision on the relation between
governments, designers and citizens. It argues for an iterative approach
to citymaking, looking for new ways to share knowledge between and
collaborate with a variety of stakeholders. It provides room for both
citizens, as well as designers and institutions, to become active agents
of change as hackers of their environments.

Whereas the notion of the hacker refers to the means, ethos and
practices of individuals to intervene in city making, its companion term
hackability refers to the system that is to be hacked, in our case the
city. Hacking is often described in terms of a power struggle between
hackers and system owners, both in a literal and metaphorical sense. As
we argued above, the success of cities as economic and cultural systems
depends partially on their hackability. Yet system owners (mainly the
government) may or may not set all kinds of legal rules that either
facilitate or prohibit the appropriation of urban infrastructures. Can
we now imagine an infrastructure of the city (in its broadest sense)
that welcomes ‘civic hacks’? How could the city as a system be opened
up, so hacking into it will be easier for citizens, in such a way that
it will still serve the public interest? What could the role of city
governments, architects and planners, technologists and citizens be in
such an approach? The notion of the hackable city addresses these
questions, and at the same time takes a critical stance. It forces us to
ask questions about the governance of hackable city projects as well as
to identify its risks.

Whereas we have no easy answers to any of the eight questions raised in
this framework, we think that finding one or more possible directions to
address them is essential to safeguard our cities as democratic and open
systems in the era of the platform society. That’s what drives our
research, and also our first experiments down this road that will be
explored further in the Hackable City Toolkit in the next chapter.

# The Hackable City Toolkit
![](imgs/HvA_HackableCities_breaker4.png)
&nbsp;

How can citizens, design professionals, local government institutions
and others employ digital media platforms in collaborative processes of
urban planning, management and social organization, to contribute to a
liveable and resilient city, with a strong social fabric? The goal of
our research project is not just to approach this question from a
theoretical perspective, but also to explore how new media technologies
can be employed in the messy practice of everyday urban life.

In order to answer the latter question, in the period 2013-2014 we
carried out a mapping of initiatives in the city of Amsterdam that in
some way or another used digital media to ‘hack’ into the city. That is:
we were looking for initiatives that used digital media to organize
themselves around particular issues with the goal of improving their
direct surroundings or urban life at large. Rather than waiting for
policy makers to come up with a solution to a problem, these groups
organized themselves to identify issues, organize campaigns around them,
and find ways to collaboratively act upon these issues. We also looked
at the ways in which projects matched Pekka Himanen’s hacker learning
model in which a continuously evolving learning and doing environment is
shaped by the learners themselves (Himanen, 2001). Another criterion was
the presence of a social model that Himanen assigns to the hacker ethic.
In this model, projects usually start with somebody’s initiative whose
limited knowledge or resources only allow him to develop his idea to a
certain extent. The project is then opened up to the community to
further develop the idea. In all these projects, digital media play a
central role as a tool that brings the community together. When these
ideas involve projects bound to specific locations, such as community
gardens or house construction, the internet is used as an effective
means for joining forces and later disseminating and developing the idea
further.

We inventoried 84 such projects, varying from groups of people building
their own homes, to citizens organizing themselves around local issues
such as safety or health, to sharing economy initiatives. Our goal was
to try to understand who initiated these projects, what the issues were
they are occupied with, and how they tackled them.

<div class="streams"><hr class="streams" />
Although many of these projects were initiated by citizens or professionals, many of them
operated in cooperation with a variety of institutional stakeholders
<hr class="streams" /></div>

Some of these projects were initiated by citizens, others by
professionals. Some rely on voluntary actions, or are financed by state
or city subsidies, others were set up as start-ups. Most of them
employed both digital technologies as well as offline ways of
organization through meet-ups and interventions in public space. They
also operated on different scale levels: from the hyper-local to the
global.

Through a survey, we identified the stakeholders involved in these
projects as well as their goals and uses of digital media. About 80% of
the projects that responded to our survey said they were initiated by a
newly formed group of individuals, followed by 30% that were initiated
by an existing community and 10% were either entrepreneurial or
established by non-profit organizations. Many of these projects
addressed a personal wish or urge of their initiators. For example
Thuisafgehaald.nl was developed as a side project out of the wish of its
initiators to share food with their neighbors and try out new homemade
dishes. Others are quests for alternative modes of area development
initiated by self-employed creatives that look for ways to operate
outside traditional schemes. Examples are Glamourmanifest or Cascoland.

Although many of these projects were initiated by citizens or
professionals, many of them operated in cooperation with a variety of
institutional stakeholders. Many of the projects surveyed reported ties
to the ‘stadsdelen’ (the administrative city government units operating
at the level of city districts). The central municipality was also
mentioned as stakeholder or partner, but significantly less than the
*stadsdelen*, the official term for Amsterdam’s City precincts. This
shows that many of the projects surveyed are working in a decentralised
framework. Of the non-governmental agents, Liander and Ymere stuck out.
Liander is the largest utility company in the Netherlands, responsible
for the management of the electricity and gas network, mainly in the
northern part of the country. It is also a partner in many projects
supported by the Amsterdam Economic Board and has initiated a number of
energy-related small-scale pilots. Ymere is a housing corporation with a
social profile that supports mainly citizen-initiated projects in areas
where they manage a large proportion of the buildings.

The issues and goals these projects seek to address can be classified in
a three (partially overlapping) main categories:

-   A first group of projects seeks to advance a more sustainable
    management of resources, including themes of energy production and
    management as well as local food production, urban farming and
    exchange networks.

-   A second group of projects aims to improve social cohesion. Their
    main objective is to bring people together and encourage them to
    interact, considering interpersonal interaction something positive
    on its own. The result is a variety of activities that range from
    yoga and language lessons to discussion groups, communal gardens
    and workshops. Neighborhood cultural centres or artistic projects
    are examples in this area.

-   A third group of projects consists of projects that seek to improve
    the liveability of neighborhoods. These are usually tied to a
    specific location and aim to upgrade the local conditions. This can
    be people who gather in order to re-develop their areas, projects
    that address issues of mobility and access to and the care of
    the environment.

In our survey, the goal most mentioned was ‘More efficient and
sustainable resource management’. A large part of these projects deal
with the theme of energy. This is either addressed by looking into
alternative models of producing energy, e.g. by collectively installing
solar panels or windmills or exploring different ways of managing the
produced energy, for example by sharing locally produced energy. Many of
these projects also try to monitor energy use and test possible
applications of smart meters, dynamic pricing etc. on behalf of big
energy companies. Many of the urban agriculture and farming projects fit
in this category as well, since they also explore new ways to produce
food locally.

There are also a large number of projects that have stated as their main
goal ‘to create or sustain a feeling of community among the inhabitants
of a neighborhood’ and ‘improve social cohesion’. There are many
different ways they try to do that, but they are mostly centred around a
meeting place and the organization of common activities.

The main difference between these two types of projects lies mainly in
who is behind them. Many of the energy projects are initiated or
supported by large corporations and are used as pilots for the
application of new technologies on a wider scale. In the case of the
community building projects, the only large organizations involved are
occasionally housing corporations, while the local governments are very
often initiating or supporting them.

Seven of the 84 projects we have identified were chosen for an in depth
analysis through interviews and analysis of their media use and
practices. These projects were chosen to represent a diverse cross
section of the long list of projects, both in terms of theme as well as
in organizational structure and the issue of who initiated them. These
projects are:

-   BSH5, a community of self-builders in Amsterdam North

-   Farming the City, a research organization on urban agriculture,

-   Join the Pipe, an organization campaigning for tap water drinking,

-   Makers+Co, a designers’ group empowering a local community,

-   Peerby, a sharing economy start-up,

-   Ring-Ring, a mobile phone app promoting cycling

-   Verbeter de Buurt, a platform for reporting local problems
    and ideas.

Through the survey and the in-depth analyses, we have constructed a
taxonomy of phases we found in the ‘hackable citymaking’ process as well
as a taxonomy of hackable citymaking strategies. We found that hackable
citymaking projects go through seven phases, which range from defining
the issue to engaging the public around it, providing this public with
means to act and ways to institutionalize the city hack. This seven step
model is comparable to existing models for social organization or living
labs and can be reduced to a single question: How can the public be
engaged around a communal issue and act upon it? What is specifically
interesting for our research purposes is the role of new media in this
process. We found that in many of these phases, they provide new means
for the execution of that phase. Although not all projects go through
all seven phases or follow the same order in doing so, we found this
categorization useful as these seven phases reveal a number of (often
implicit) design decisions that influence the ways a hackable city
project is organized and hence its effectiveness. These seven phases
will be discussed further down.

In addition, in order to be successful, we found that many hackable city
projects make use of a variety of strategies. In the projects we
studied, we came across eight recurring strategies. These strategies
include the organization of knowledge communities to exchange knowledge
and enable learning, the setup of trust-building mechanisms and the
design of institutional frameworks. Again: not every project makes use
of all of these strategies, and the way they do so may vary according to
the needs of the project. This list of strategies is also far from
exhaustive. Yet we found it insightful to describe eight of these
strategies, as they may give organizers and designers of future projects
some guidance of the kind of tools and strategies they could revert to.
An overview of the strategies we found will be given below in the
Hackable City Strategies-section.

In future research, the hackable city phases and hackable city
strategies will be developed further. We have started here by singling
them out and giving a first array of insights in the role of new media
in these phases and strategies. In addition, we have added the
description of seven case studies. Whereas our Toolkit (the combination
of the Hackable City Phases and the Hackable City Strategies) describes
phases and strategies in rather general terms, in the case studies we
will describe how they were applied in a number of projects in more
detail.

## The Hackable City Process

![Figure 2: Citymaking](images/31citymakingprocess.png)

Figure 2: Citymaking process 

1)  Projects start with the definition of an issue by an actor.

2)  That issue then has to be communicated. We found that visualization
    tools play an important part here.

3)  Next, a larger public has to be engaged with the issue, through
    online and offline campaigns.

4)  This public needs a platform on which it can be represented in some
    way or another, and where participants can identify and communicate
    with others, and learn about the composition of the group.

5)  In many cases these platforms serve as a way to ideate upon
    the issue. What solutions are thinkable and/or desirable?

6)  Once one or more solutions are agreed upon, the public needs means
    to act upon them, share resources or contribute to the common goal,
    each according to their means and available resources.

7)  Now that a project is up and running, how can it be made to last,
    and have a sustainable impact on the functioning of the city?

  [COMMENT1 one very messy table. what to do with this?]
--------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Hackable City Phase   Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         The role of digital media                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Example 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Example 2

  Define an issue       Hackable City projects revolve around a central theme or issue brought up by an initiating actor. An important question is to what extent this process of setting central issues is an open one, or a closed one. Who has the power to come up with issues?                                                                         New media can change this step in at least two ways. First, at least theoretically, this process can become more open and democratic, for instance through the use of fora and social media, providing citizens with platforms to voice their concerns. Second, the advent of sensors and the rise of ‘big’ and open data provide new ways to open up discussions about societal issues, for instance when citizens start using sensors to monitor air pollution, noise, etc.                                                                                                                                                                                  \[Here '3\_2\_hackable city process\_Komapsopijburg'\]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                \[Here '3\_3\_hackable city process\_Citizensense'\]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           KompasopIJburg.nl is a website that offers residents of the Amsterdam neighborhood, Ijburg a tool to name (and vote for) issues they would like to address.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Citizen Sensing or Citizen Science are labels for projects in which citizens have started to gather data about all kinds of societal issues, from noise pollution near airports through sound sensors to collaborative maps that identify how fracking (natural gas extraction) is impacting the living environment.

  Visualize an issue    In order to communicate the issue with others, initiators should be able to collect information that can help them build an argument and to visualize this information in ways that engages the public and that can make it operational for the continuation of the initiative.                                                     Datavis allows for new digital ways to visualize issues. This can be done in real time. Another novelty is that digital representation also allows for personalization, so that individual as well as communal concerns and contributions can be visualized.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \[Here '3\_4\_hackable city process\_Trashtrack'\]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \[Here '3\_5\_hackable city process\_Intheair'\]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MIT’s Senseable City’s Trash Track project used beautiful maps to make the issue of trash visible in both collective (where does all our trash go), as well as individual (where did my trash end up) ways.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Medialab Prado’s project In the Air was one of the first projects that visualized digital data in public space, turning data about air quality in Madrid into a physical ‘conversation piece’

  Engage                In this phase, a larger public is to be engaged with the issue. It’s about informing potential subjects about the issue and their potential involvement in it, as well as convincing them about its importance. This is not only about showing convincing rational arguments but also addressing the issue at an affective level.   Social media are a new form of campaigning tools, allowing for ‘spreadability’ of engaging messages. Other new tools in this area are gamification and personalization tools. The former allows for playful opportunities to engage subjects, the latter can show to what extent an issue is affecting individuals, offering opportunities for identification.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \[Here '3\_6\_hackable city process\_Rezone'\]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        \[Here '3\_7\_hackable city process\_Toon'\]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rezone the Game was a project carried out in Den Bosch that used playful interventions to engage the public with the issue of vacant industrial buildings. It allowed the public to playfully explore the site of a factory, providing them with a new, affective relationship to their environment.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Toon by Eneco is a smart display that publishes real time data about energy use, and allows clients to compare their use to neighbors or friends, providing them with objective information about energy conservation, and at the same time gamifying this goal into a ‘comparison game’.

  Represent             Each public needs to find a way to represent itself, as well as a platform and protocols through which its members can communicate with each other. Strategies range from physical rallies and demonstrations in public space to the use of online discussion for a.                                                                New media provide all kinds of new ways for the representation of publics. The public can both be made visible as an aggregate or community at large (how much energy have we saved / money have we raised/ bike kilometers have we travelled together), as well as a range of individuals (what are the characteristics / contributions of individual members). Individuals can be represented anonymously, as avatars, through existing social media accounts (e.g. a Facebook ID), with limited information about themselves revealed, or with full profiles. Reputation systems are also a new digital tool that could help audiences to build up trust.   \[Here '3\_8\_hackable city process\_sharing'\]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       \[Here '3\_9\_hackable city process\_obscuracam'\]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            There is no right or wrong here, just that different publics and different causes ask for different means of representations and means of privacy.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             In many instances of the sharing economy, reputation systems, as well as existing social media profiles, play an important part in the representation of the public, allowing fellow members of the public to evaluate past and potential collaborators. Whereas this may help to build up trust and enable individuals to work together on a communal goal, it is not unproblematic. Its use has raised issues about privacy, opportunities to exclude members of different cultural or racial backgrounds as well as the instrumentalization of social relations.   Obscuracam is an app that lets people take pictures of crowds in which the faces of those present are scrambled. This way, the crowd can be represented (look how many of us there are!) without viewers being able to identify individuals within the crowd. Such a tool may come in handy in situations in which the powers that be may not be sympathetic to a crowd of demonstrators.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Choices in the design of a mode of representation may affect the ways individuals can identify with fellow members of the public, or feel secure within in a community.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

  Ideate                It is important that the public is able to generate ideas and new solutions for the issue at stake. The project itself can function as a platform for dialogue and co-creation.                                                                                                                                                     Digital media can make design tools more accessible through user friendly interfaces that open up the design process to non-professionals. It also provides new tools for (online) deliberation, as well as tools that allow the testing of particular scenarios.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              \[Here '3\_10\_hackable city process\_Streetmix'\]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \[Here '3\_11\_hackable city process\_Baasopzuid'\]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Streetmix is an online tool that allows citizens to design their own streets, by dragging and dropping a number of predesigned categories onto a canvas. Tools like this could help citizens to ideate about redesigns for their neighborhoods, by trying things out and using an easy to understand visual language to communicate their ideas amongst each other.                                                                                                                                                                                                   BaasopZuid is an early example of a playful simulation that allows players to see the consequences of particular policy choices (investing in green spaces vs investing in play grounds) visualized in a neighborhood.

  Act                   In the end, each public needs to find ways to act upon the issue concerned, either as a collective or through individual contributions.                                                                                                                                                                                             New media offer various new tools for action. First of all, resources can be made available or shared through online platforms, by mapping, sharing or crowdfunding platforms. Second, matchmaking platforms can team up and coordinate individuals willing to act, or distribute large tasks into smaller portions through crowdsourcing. Mapping tools can also turn maps from media of representation into ‘action maps’: by combining various datasets, locations for interventions in particular domains may become visible.                                                                                                                              \[Here '3\_12\_hackable city process\_collaborativemaps'\]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            \[Here '3\_13\_hackable city process\_crowdfunding'\]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Online collaborative maps such as livinglotsnyc.org give an overview of opportunities to act by mapping empty city lots, providing information about their owners as well as communities that are activating the site.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Crowdfunding and crowdsourcing platforms such as Voorjebuurt.nl allow communities to organize around an event or site in their neighborhood and share resources, both financial as well as non-financial.

  Institutionalize      How can a hackable city-initiative be made to last? Can they scale-up, be made replicable, or develop ties or spin out to existing institutions?                                                                                                                                                                                    As this phase is more of about organization and legal and institutional contexts and structures, digital media technologies play less of a role here. Although they could play a role in the way systems interoperate. Through API’s or other tools, the data or insights gathered by a hackable city project can be linked to institutional databases or monitoring systems.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  \[Here '3\_13A\_hackable city process\_Uber'\]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        \[Here 3\_13B\_Idee\_voor\_je\_buurt\]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Companies such as Airbnb and Uber have grown so much that many municipalities have been forced to consider the implications of these economies for their cities. Recently Airbnb was asked to collect a hotel tax from the listings on the website, formally being recognised as an accomodation provider.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sometimes established institutions integrate platforms that were developed outside these institutions. For instance, in 2014 Amsterdam Municipality piloted a Dutch version of Change by Us, called "Idee voor je buurt". 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Uber has also consented to share anonimized data about the trasportation habits of its clients with city authorities to improve public transportation.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
  --------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Hackable City Strategies

![Figure 3: Types of 'scapes'](images/41hackablecitystrategies.png)
&nbsp;

<table width="95%" height="100%" border="1">

<tr>

<td><img src="images/4_2_hackable city-strategies_knowledge_text.png" />

</td>

<td>
A Knowledge Community is a group of people with certain
expertise, gained either by education or by intense occupation
with a given issue, who are willing to come together and
share their knowledge both among themselves and externally.
Knowledge Communities are useful to hackable citymaking
because they form the first step of creating a pool of collective intelligence and allow participants to learn from each other.
It’s also a way to institutionalize the knowledge gained in a
project and make it available for those who join later. These
communities can take the form of physical gatherings, such
as a ‘knowledge café’, or knowledge can be exchanged and
codified through mailing lists, forums, social media groups,
blogs or wikis.
</td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td>
<img src="images/4_3_hackable-city-strategies_communitymarket_text.png" />
</td>

<td>
By establishing Community Marketplaces, the members of a group can gain access to products, services, and experiences delivered by their fellow members and exchange them on a peer-to-peer basis. They can take the form of online platforms, social media self-organized groups or mobile phone apps. The exchange of goods and services can be voluntary, or financially rewarded. Sometimes, alternative bookkeeping systems are used (such as time banks).
</td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td>
<img src="images/4_4_hackable-city-strategies_awareness_text.png.png" />
</td>

<td>
Awareness Campaigns serve to make an issue visible to a wider public and are usually a first step to engaging a group of people willing to commit time and resources into an issue. It can also serve as a strategy to disseminate the results of an ideation process. Campaigns can have traditional forms of distributing printed material such as posters or flyers, social media campaigns or can take the form of guerrilla interventions and public art projects. Many projects make use of a combination of offline and online campaigns.
</td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td>
<img src="images/4_5_hackable-city-strategies_capacity_text.png" />
</td>

<td>
Capacity building is an important step for hackable citymaking initiatives because it allows non-expert members of a community to develop their skills, knowledge and abilities, making them feel more empowered to act in the framework of the initiative’s engagement, ideation and action steps. Tools that contribute to capacity building include co-creation sessions, workshops, design journeys, storytelling or role-playing. Persuasive or serious games can also play a role here.
</td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td>
<img src="images/4_6_hackable-city-strategies_visualize_text.png" />
</td>

<td>
A way to make collected data operational is to present it in a way that it can reveal opportunities for ideation and action. In order to visualize development opportunities, one can employ, among others, tools such as infographics and data visualizations, stakeholder mapping, digital fieldwork and systems maps. The idea is to present (real-time) data analysis in such a way that participants can easily find out where opportunities for action are available.
</td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td>
<img src="images/4_7_hackable-city-strategies_governance_text.png" />
</td>

<td>
Expanding its practices into an institutionalized context and having an influence on a societal scale, a hackable citymaking initiative often needs tools that either improve existing governmental processes or propose alternatives. In order to do that, they need to design new governance frameworks and advocate for their adoption by relevant institutional bodies. In order to achieve that, they might need to write specifications documents and participate in lobbying bodies and organisations.
</td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td>
<img src="images/4_8_hackable-city-strategies_commonsmanagement_text.png" />
</td>

<td>
Under this name, we include all tools that regulate the management of existing resources either by proposing new business models around them or by changing the processes with which communities have access to communal resources such as energy. Tools that contribute to Commons Resources Management can be systems that automate the distribution of the particular resource, like smart meters, incentive giving structures like dynamic pricing, or simple scheduling plans among users.
</td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td>
<img src="images/4_9_hackable-city-strategies_trust_text.png" />
</td>

<td>
Under the term Trust Brokers, we include any kind of activity with the goal of increasing the feeling of belonging and connectedness among community members. Many of the projects in our original research stated ‘community building’ as their primary goal and the tools they used to arrive at that included any kind of low threshold activities, such as collective cooking events, language or dance lessons. Other tools to increase trust among community members can be neighborhood suggestion boxes and informal meetings.
</td>

</tr>

</table>


# Case studies
![](imgs/HvA_HackableCities_breaker5.png)
&nbsp;

## BSH5 

BSH5 is an informal group consisting of the self-builders (a Dutch term
referring to individuals who are building their own homes, an uncommon
practice in the Netherlands due to regulation) of 18 small plots on a
collective lot (‘Lot 5’) in Buiksloterham, a brownfield redevelopment in
the northern part of Amsterdam. Since 2011, BSH5 is organised via
personal meetings, a website and a mailing list that allows the group
members to coordinate their activities and exchange experience. Their
objective is not only to develop their individual houses, but also to
contribute design suggestions for the neighbouring public space, a
community centre, a shared warehouse, as well as to create temporary
urban gardens in empty pieces of land and to create a ‘dream atlas’, a
repository of ideas about Buiksloterham.

The Municipality of Amsterdam decided to allocate several plots of land
in the former industrial area of Buiksloterham for development by
individual users on the basis of a 50-year lease. Early adopters of this
development model, such as those in Lot 5, were mostly architects and
designers. Their professional occupation allowed them to appreciate the
opportunity and estimate the necessary time and costs involved. The
initial success of Lot5 led to the allocation of several other lots of
varied sizes, with a higher diversity of involved self-developers. In
2013, it was estimated that about 210 houses and apartments would be
self-build in the Buiksloterham area.

According to Martijn Meester, owner of one of the plots in Lot5, getting
together to form a group emerged out of necessity. All future
inhabitants were encouraged by the Municipality to come together and
figure out how they could profit from their collaboration. Their
collaboration was partly meant to coordinate major building activities
and practical things, such as laying the foundations and negotiating
better prices for building materials with retailers. Resources
concerning sustainable building solutions, energy provision, materials
and even the designs of the houses are collected in the BSH5 website,
which also hosts a blog with news about the building process.

Evidently, this community was not formed out of an ideal about ‘knowing
your neighbours’ but out of self-interested individuals engaged in a
common activity. At the same time, social benefits emerged as a side
product; as people got to know each other, a community of neighbours
formed even before people actually moved into their new houses. The
contact with the Municipality has been very smooth and helpful for the
inhabitants. Since it is the first time the city has made such an
effort, it was a learning-by-doing process for all the involved parties.
Especially in the beginning when the contracts were set up, the
Municipality was very open to suggestions on how to make this happen and
sought to understand what their actions might mean for the future
development of this place.

This positive feedback loop between the city and the self-builders
continued after the completion of the houses with the residents having
an active voice in issues that affect the public space in the vicinity
of their properties. In May 2013, the inhabitants of Lot 5 submitted
their proposal for the design of the Bosrankstraat, which the City
accepted as a starting point for the technical development into a final
design. But this close relationship between the Municipality and the
self-builders is also criticized. According to the local neighborhood
blog ‘I love Noord’, the self-builders are trying to create a gated
community under the guise of child-friendliness and greener
surroundings.
(http://www.ilovenoord.nl/2014/07/gated-community-in-buiksloterham/\#sthash.womF934z.gbpl)


![Figure:example1](images/51BSH5example1.png)

![Figure:example2](images/51BSH5example2.jpg)

###Running a blog as a knowledge community

BSH5 is a hackable citymaking case in that it brings together two
parties that have not traditionally collaborated in urban development.
The Amsterdam Municipality circumvented housing corporations and big
developers and addressed individuals interested in developing their
houses. This created a knowledge community of people with a common goal
and their collective experience fed into a policy change from the side
of the City, setting the basis for the design of a new governance
framework.

At its current state, BSH5 is a group of 30-40 people, living in 15
households spread over 18 plots. The small size of the community was a
reason to maintain an informal structure and not organize into a
foundation or any other legal form. BSH5 is not a community primarily
driven by ICT. They rely on their interpersonal relations and make very
little use of digital tools. They use a mailing list to organize
internally and a Wordpress-based website where each one can post under
their own name either updates on the construction of their houses or
solutions and ideas on particular construction issues. There is also a
closed Facebook group, called ‘Individuele zelfbouw in Buiksloterham’
with 37 members, including self-builders and other local entrepreneurs.
The discussion concerns news about Amsterdam Noord and the development
of the buildings. The digital media they use influences neither the
ideation nor the direct actions that stem from their collaboration.

As a community, BSH5 is mostly concerned with very practical issues that
concern the construction of their homes. With most of them being
architects themselves, BSH5 is a knowledge community that directly puts
their expertise to work for this small-scale development project. They
exchange solutions on how to do things in a house, such as dealing with
energy, internet, heating and so on and they share their research on
costs and how long things take. Collectively, they have undertaken more
complex tasks, such as laying the foundation, but they have also
negotiated with retailers for better prices by ordering large amounts of
material.

At the beginning of this process, the people involved had a lot of
meetings and aspired to make a book and a film about their experiment,
an ambition that became a second priority as the practicalities of
building construction slowly took over. The online knowledge exchange
and coordination meetings and constant exchange of e-mails gave way to
face-to-face contact, now that the building site is the regular meeting
place. As a group, they don’t actively try to spread their experience.
They share ideas on the website and they still hope to make the film at
some point, but BSH5 is a rather closed community, with not much
interest in externalising its experience. All in all, they consider the
city’s initiative successful and hope that this way of development will
become a formal process within the city of Amsterdam.

From the side of the Municipality, the same experiment has been repeated
in 6 other lots, which were proposed for self-development, showing the
intention to institutionalize this process and adjust the legal
framework so that it can be applied in other areas and create a new
model of urban development.

From a Hackable City perspective, this example raises a number of
issues. What is interesting is that this approach of area development
through self-builders provides citizens with more opportunities to have
a say in the development process of the city, both for their individual
homes as well as for the design of collective resources such as parks
and urban infrastructures. Opening up the development of the city for
these parties could lead to more innovative and sustainable approaches.

A knowledge exchange has been set up that allows participants to learn
from each other, and at the same time allows government institutions to
learn about the process as well. Feedback from the experiences of the
self-builders is fed back into the instigation of new development
frameworks for the next self-building site. The question that remains is
how this process can be made more durable. Knowledge exchange occurs
mostly through informal networks within the community itself, with
limited opportunity for newly found self-building groups to tap into the
knowledge base. Similarly, a need may emerge to also make the assessment
of the self-builders actions by the government more lasting. How can
their experiences and contributions (or lack thereof) in relation to the
public interest (e.g. their involvement in public space development,
innovative ways of building environmentally sustainable homes) be
measured or otherwise indicated? And how can the outcomes of these
processes be fed back into new tender procedures or development
frameworks?

## Farming the City


Farming the City is a research project and online platform investigating
the impact of local food initiatives and urban agriculture in built
environments, economic systems and community cohesion in the global
north. In November 2010, Farming the City started by launching an online
platform to collect urban agriculture projects, plots of land available
to potential urban farmers and volunteers who wished to support this
type of project. This online tool was intended to stimulate a global
knowledge community and lead to replicable projects in many cities in
the global north. Since August 2013, Farming the City’ s team became an
independent business and policy advisory group for the development of
innovative food-related initiatives.

Farming the City started out with the ambition to use urban farming to
reactivate derelict urban areas, but this proved to be very ambitious
and rather naïve, as they soon realised that the food process is much
more complex and changes are needed in the whole production cycle. But
even though it is impossible to be completely self-sufficient by
cultivating one’s own food in an urban setting , there are many social
benefits from engaging in urban agriculture. Farming the City mapped
Amsterdam’s urban agriculture scene, depicting its characteristics and
connecting its stakeholders, and adopted the food production and
distribution system, as the main framework within which to position
several case studies.

Their first research findings revealed that there are people with very
different backgrounds and identities that share the goal of reconnecting
the production and consumption of food in urban environments, but
despite the fact that they all work in the same field they rarely
interact with each other. With the support of Amsterdam Municipality,
they consequently put together a map of Amsterdam with 19 innovative
case studies, organized per Stadsdeel (city district), realizing that
most projects address mostly sourcing and consuming food and not
packaging or transportation. In order to test these observations on a
larger scale, they launched an online application with the same goal,
which functioned as a database of projects, people and ideas on a global
scale. This fulfilled a double goal of the organization: on one hand to
focus on Amsterdam and map the people who are involved in local food
processes (sourcing, preparation, transportation and consumption), look
at how they participate, what their needs and problems are, and on the
other hand to use a global input for inspiration, while expanding the
community of landowners, food growers and volunteers.


![Figure:example1](images/52farmingexample1.PNG)

![Figure:example2](images/52farmingexample2.jpg)

###Visualizing Development opportunities through online maps

The online platform collected different types of information depending
on the project, such as location, type (roof, garden, plot etc.), how
many paid people were working there, how many volunteers and the scale
of the project by means of a questionnaire. This information was then
formatted into reports meant to share knowledge among experienced and
prospective urban farmers. Additionally, landowners could indicate the
position and size of their empty plots and offer them for cultivation.
In response, people could volunteer to cultivate or to participate in an
existing project. Others could propose a project they would like to
start and ask for a piece of land to host their ideas. However, they did
not actively map and support the interaction among community members and
the resources they collected were inspiring but hardly helpful for their
hands-on projects in Amsterdam.

The platform stayed online until 2013 and it was growing in terms of
active users and projects mentioned but eventually, Farming the City
deemed the global input difficult to manage and often unable to directly
contribute to their local projects and decided to take the platform
offline in order to focus on the actual projects and people in
Amsterdam. Digital media had been useful for communication but in terms
of producing content, face-to-face meetings and testing things in
reality are irreplaceable. The online platform created an inspiring
database of projects, ideas and technical solutions from all over the
world, but these projects were often too site-specific to be directly
applicable in Amsterdam and the community was too loose to actually
profit from their interaction.

At the same time, the local community in Amsterdam was able to meet
face-to-face in order to exchange practical ideas and experiences. As a
result, Farming the City actually decided to downsize their reach and
focus on the city scale, adjusting their plans for a similar app that
would function in the same way as the online platform but within
Amsterdam, so that people could find projects and gardens where they
could farm. Farming the City still maintains an active online presence
but it is mostly to report on their activities, rather than a two-way
communication.

Farming the City’s online platform aimed to fulfil a double function as
a Knowledge Community of people with some experience or interest in
urban agriculture who would share their practical understanding of food
production and as a Community Marketplace where urban farming projects
could find volunteers willing to invest their time and knowledge to
support them and land owners who could offer their land to be
cultivated. At the same time, it aimed to become a tool for Visualizing
Development Opportunities, leading to a new business model of
sustainable food transportation, and to create a practical guide of
getting an urban farming project off the ground in the city of
Amsterdam.

## Join the Pipe 


Join the Pipe is a small organization that aims to redefine the drinking
water distribution system, by campaigning against bottled water and
promoting drinking tap water. Join the Pipe was driven by the
observation that although in the Netherlands tap water is of very high
quality, bottled water sales are rising, because of people’s preference
to convenience. But bottled water is both a lot more expensive and
generates a large amount of plastic garbage. In order to change the
habit of consuming bottled water, Join the Pipe provides easy access to
tap water in public spaces by installing public water taps.
Additionally, Join the Pipe sells design water bottles to individuals
and water carafes to restaurants and allocates its profits to
water-related projects in the developing world.

In the terms of hackable citymaking: Join the Pipe is hacking into the
existing water distribution and consumption infrastructure, in order to
create a new cultural practice with a positive impact on the environment
and side effects beneficial for the developing world. It is doing that
by proposing alternative business models for the management of drinkable
water and using diverse campaign tactics for promoting its goal.

The main idea of Join the Pipe is to create a mutually beneficial
condition for the Netherlands and for several communities in the
developing world, by eliminating plastic garbage in the first case and
by providing clean, drinkable water in the second. Their campaigning
includes a variety of tools. Apart from the physical presence of the
water taps in public spaces, Join the Pipe pays a lot of attention to
the media coverage of the placement of the water taps, thus proposing a
cultural change around water consumption, and installs temporary taps
during public events.

![Figure:example1](images/53pipeexample1.jpg)

![Figure:example2](images/53pipeexample2.jpg)

###Turning drinking water into a commons

Join the Pipe was started in 2008 by a small group of people, contacting
Municipalities, railway stations, sports clubs and schools, asking them
if Join the Pipe could place water stations in their premises or in
other areas with public access. The money earned from these projects
would be allocated to fund water stations in African communities.
Currently, there are about 350 taps in public spaces around the country;
a number that is gradually increasing and allows the company to make
plans to expand in Germany. Concerning other countries, the process of
setting up branches is very slow and expensive and mostly depends on the
amount of actual or potential projects. The nature of their work, which
includes various campaigning tools that are connected to a specific
site, makes it difficult to expand without strong local connections,
which take time to develop.

The main issues that Join the Pipe tries to address in the Netherlands
are the increased amount of plastic waste, inaccessible tap water, and
the increased consumption of sweet beverages in place of water. The
organization generally engages in more traditional marketing campaigns,
such as partnering with festivals that donate part of their earnings for
water projects or with an amusement park that includes the initiative in
their advertising. They participate at events and fairs about water
sanitation and sustainability, which is their main source of clients.
Finally, significant attention is placed in promoting the design
bottles. The funny shaped bottles attract attention and are a mobile
advertisement for the projects.

###Awareness campaigns through social media

Join the Pipe is primarily a campaigning organization so the use of
social media is a big part of their strategy with regular posts on both
Facebook and Twitter. Its campaigns are mainly about spreading the word
and do not explicitly aim to connect the people interested with each
other. The content on the website is updated regularly and concerns
mostly the promotion of the organization’s activities, events,
accomplishments and partners. There is no external content or references
to other projects or resources about water management. The website
mentions a community of 3500 people (25.000 in the Dutch version).
However, these people are neither visible on the website nor do they
have any way of knowing and communicating with each other.

Other ways to inform the public are through restaurants that serve tap
water and explain the story on each table and of course, through the
bottles themselves, that also have the Join the Pipe message written on
the bottom. Especially in Africa, where internet use is not common, they
try to approach local radio stations and work with word of mouth.

## Makers + Co 


Makers+co is a group of designers that connect crafts with social
innovation in Amsterdam’s Nieuw West area. Their goal is to act as Trust
Brokers among the local inhabitants providing low threshold activities
that can create a feeling of community and connectedness among the
residents of the area. Together with other designers and creators, they
focus explicitly on people who want to discover their talents, develop
their skills and enjoy the feeling of creating something new. Makers+co
organises (local) partnerships and embeds them in long-term
trajectories. Together with their partners, they work towards a platform
for ‘new creators’ by means of the Makers Lab, a workplace for media and
crafts in their home location, Garage Notweg, a co-working space in
Nieuw West.

Makers+co was initiated by The Beach Foundation and is the product of
several designers’ preoccupation about the changing role of the designer
and what they perceive as a shift towards co-creation. In their effort
to collaborate with non-designers, they realised that they had to lower
the threshold and make the design-to-product process more accessible.
Their activities assist capacity building mainly for the youngsters and
the women of the area. They include workshops with new technologies such
as smart textiles, 3D printing and music instrument hacks. Makers+co was
launched with a festival, which served as an introduction both to the
neighborhood and the local design world. They started off by offering
workshops targeted to local women and children, but they soon discovered
that offering programs is different from engaging potential participants
in actively proposing the types of activities that they want to do.
Every Tuesday they held an open café, discussed with people who came
with ideas and did some creative sessions to map out the skills present
in the area. Out of these meetings a community started forming as well
as the first activities, which included, among others, collective
cooking and bread baking sessions, a communal garden, and a wooden
playground.

At the beginning of Makers + Co, the initiators wanted to address people
from the whole Nieuw West, which is an area home to 140.000 people, but
soon realized that this scope could not result in the development of
meaningful relationships with specific neighborhoods and their people.
Depending on the project, they work with a network approach with several
other local organisations, each one strongly related to their areas.
Their activities are organized around three pillars: 1. community
building, which means developing skills, bringing people together and
connecting to the creative community of Amsterdam, 2. develop a method
for design and making, the Maker Lab, where people can practically
experiment and learn, and 3. stage events where people can present their
work to the public, invite their friends and family and feel proud of
what they have achieved and stay motivated to continue. Makers+co keep a
distance from the municipal agenda so they can be autonomous in their
choices and create their programs together with the people who are
involved in their meetings. They see themselves as activists even though
they do not profile themselves as such, but as partners of the people in
the neighborhood, who wish to put their ideas forward. They have
observed a mistrust and disappointment towards official institutions and
don’t want to be associated with them; their independence is a way to
maintain people’s trust.

Makers+co’s most prominent goal is to reverse what they perceive as
people constantly complaining about safety, playgrounds, bad housing,
local government, housing corporations, their neighbours, and turn all
this into a proactive mindset. Directly addressing the inequality of
skills and education, particularly in the peripheral neighborhoods of
the city, by creating an institutionalized framework where people can
connect to each other, develop their skills and feel included in the
local community, Makers+co act as Capacity Builders and Trust Brokers
for Nieuw West.


![Figure:example1](images/54makersexample1.png)

![Figure:example2](images/54makersexample2.jpg)

###Trust brokering and Capacity building through events

An important aspect of their work is to bring new technologies closer to
non-professionals. In many of their activities, they have collaborated
with Amsterdam-based eculture organizations such as Mediamatic, the Waag
Society and Steim to produce workshops where participants could learn
about and prototype using 3D design software and printing, sensors and
arduino kits.

This comes to a sharp contrast with the limited use of online media.
Makers+Co doesn’t have an independent website and their social media
networks are rather limited in reach. Content wise they work as a
depository of images and reports about their activities, and are not
regularly updated. Despite their limited reach, social media play a very
important role in their communication. Every workshop is announced and
documented online and many people use social media to share what they
did because they are proud of it. In this way the results of each
activity get spread and Makers+co use this as an indicator of success
for their events. People don’t feel exposed and they even feel
comfortable with showing children online, an aspect that project
initiator Diana Krabbendam found surprising. The organisation’s website
“Nieuw West Express” (http://www.nieuwwestexpress.nl/) collects a
thorough documentation of all the workshops and the results that come
out of them. Other common means are flyers, even translated into Arabic
by a volunteer from the neighborhood and, of course, word of mouth.

The most successful way to invite people to join however is to invite
them personally, so Makers+co calls or sends personal e-mails and try to
approach them via the “ambassadors” of the neighborhood. The primary
school in the neighborhood is also an entrance to a lot of families.

When it comes to dealing with institutionalization, Makers+co don’t
actively lobby to change things but they have an informal advisory role,
as they regularly talk with the local representatives and explain how
things are going in the area and how they think about improvements.
Working in such a small scale becomes a lot simpler by the fact that
people simply know each other personally, so it is relatively easy to
approach each other. There is a regular collaboration, both with the
city as with other local institutions (eg. housing corporations) and as
these parties very often fund Makers+co activities, they care to find
more ways to work together. On the other hand, many times Makers+co take
initiatives and go ahead with them, considering that this is a way to
work faster and manage expectations better.

## Peerby 


Peerby is an online platform and mobile phone app that allows people to
borrow things they need from others in their vicinity. It is a Community
Marketplace where users can make better use of their collective
resources by sharing them within a bigger group. According to the
developers, people do not have to buy things they only need to use once
in a while, which saves them money, they make better use of collective
resources and they are encouraged to get in contact with new people in
their neighborhoods. Sharing things means that fewer products need to be
produced and thus it allows people to live more ecologically sustainable
lives. Additionally, many times the exchange not only revolves about the
item itself, but also leads to conversations on how one should use it,
the exchange of tips or even to neighbours helping each other out.

What Peerby considers as their strongest point is that their app is
question-based, which means that users ask directly for the item they
want to borrow, instead of looking through lists of available items.
Their query is sent by e-mail to the closest 100 active users within
cycle distance. People who get this notification can respond with a
‘yes’, ‘no’ or ‘not now’. If they respond positively, then they are
connected to arrange an appointment. At its current state, Peerby
manages to provide a response to 80% of the questions it receives,
within less than 30 minutes. In a nutshell, Peerby tries to match demand
and offer within a specific area, promoting access over ownership.
Peerby’s custom made platform is its basic tool of operation, as the
company’s action stops when two users get in contact with each other.
The platform is still in beta and will probably remain in a constantly
evolving state until a suitable business model is found to sustain the
project.

Other than the platform itself, community management is central to
Peerby, with daily updates on their social media accounts.

At the moment, Peerby is active in the Netherlands and Belgium and is
looking into a ‘scalable growth’ model for other countries, via an
‘ambassadors’ program. Anybody in a new location can take the initiative
to become an ‘ambassador’, collect 100 people who want to join and
contact Peerby to ‘unlock’ this area and be sure that there will enough
users to make it work.

Their conviction that the future will be based on a circular economy
urges Peerby to experiment with two types of potential business models.
In the short term, they are looking into offering insurance for
high-value items and premium subscription models but in the long term
they are talking with producers to provide community-owned products.
These products will be collectively owned by a group of people; when
demand increases for one object, a second one can be acquired and so on.
The producer will also receive back and recycle worn out or broken items
to close the loop.

![Figure:example1](images/55peerbyexample1.png)

![Figure:example2](images/55peerbyexample2.png)

![Figure:example2](images/55peerbyexample3.png)

###Commons resources management

The main issues Peerby tries to address are the economic and resource
crisis, to explore new ways of community forming and experiment with
technological possibilities. What makes this project an example of
hackable citymaking is the fact that Peerby proposes an alternative
model of managing resources, as a collectively administered commons,
accessed when in need instead of owned.

When Peerby first started, they took a very active approach to convince
enough people per neighborhood to join in order to ensure a base of
participants dense enough to allow the idea to function. They targeted
specific neighborhoods and tried to connect with existing local
networks. In this way they ran one-month long neighborhood campaigns
which concluded with a big party, publicly rewarding the people who
managed to recruit more followers.

From then on, they have worked predominantly through word of mouth and
social media. The indirect, free publicity they received because of the
positive press reviews were also important. According to communications
manager Ieteke Schouten, this is because Peerby sees the management of
stuff in an area as a logistic problem, which can potentially cover the
needs of all the inhabitants while at the same time it follows an
existing trend of more local community forming, where people look for
ways to reconnect with their neighbours.

In terms of representation, however, the app users have no overview of
the other platform users and can only contact a small number of them
when one poses a question. Thus, the public at any given moment is never
larger than 100 people and has no means to understand themselves as a
body of like-minded people.

In terms of working together with the city, Peerby initially thought the
municipality could be a portal to individual neighborhoods, but their
early approaches fell on deaf ears. Now that the project has had a
positive course and more sharing economy initiatives are sprouting, they
recognize more openness on the part of the city. However, Peerby is
developing very fast and growing increasingly concerned with the lack of
regulation around sharing economies. Peerby’s activity is mostly about
small, cheap things, which means they face less insurance related issues
and their competition with major market competitors is limited. Still,
they have joined forces with other similar initiatives to advocate for a
change in the legal framework regarding sharing economies through the
creation of ShareNL, a joint initiative by Peerby, Konnektid, Toogethr,
Snappcar, Thuisafgehaald and FLOOW2, that deals with issues of the
sharing economy in the Netherlands and engages in dialogue with
legislators for the establishment of new regulations that can support
these new types of activities. The main issues they address with regards
to governance concern control and taxation of sharing economy
activities, worker’s rights and insurance of involved parties.

## Ring Ring 

Ring-Ring is a citizen-initiated pilot project that campaigns for more
extensive use of the bicycle by rewarding cycling kilometres. Ring-Ring
targets the IJburg local community in a playful way by gamifying cycling
via a mobile phone app. There are personal rewards, for example,
discounts in local shops and a quarterly winner for having cycled the
most. Other rewards have a collective character. For instance, for every
kilometre biked, a small amount of money is allocated to neighborhood
funds by the city government. At the same time Ring-Ring is actively
lobbying for the change of the legal framework so that cyclists are
rewarded for their healthy and environmentally friendly choice with
tax-exemptions.

Ring-Ring is the personal initiative of Janine Hogendoorn, who found
herself in a position of having to commute a long distance from her new
house in IJburg to her work in the city centre. After trying all
different modes of transport, she decided that the 30 minute long cycle
ride was not as difficult as she originally thought and embarked on an
effort to convince others to do the same.

She noticed that many people complain about rising health care costs,
child obesity and other negative effects of a sedentary life while, at
the same time, cycling, which is so widespread in the Netherlands, is
framed negatively, with a lot of attention to accidents, lack of bike
racks, and insufficient infrastructure. According to Hogendoorn,
employers compensate traveling costs when one commutes by car, for
example, but there is no reward for using the bike, which is both
environmentally friendlier and healthier for its user. After initial
plans to open an information shop about cycling, she started looking for
other people who might be interested in join forces with her, managed to
get the government to look at her research about the benefits of
cycling, got a European subsidy and went on to create Ring-Ring as a
research-by-doing test.

The underlying concept is that choosing the healthiest and fastest way
of urban commuting should be rewarded based on usage. This can be
measured via one’s smartphone, which is much cheaper than any custom
made gadget. The phone knows the owner’s departure time, acceleration
and route and based on these can be 90% sure that one is cycling.

Even though Hogendoorn, defines herself as an activist, she finds it
important that people can join Ring-Ring for their own reasons, so she
is purposely trying to avoid giving a specific identity to the app.
Cycling can fit into many types of agendas, be it about public space,
health, traffic management, air quality and so on, so she doesn’t want
to exclude any potential users. Ring-Ring’s main effort is to make
people proud of cycling and there are no better ambassadors than
cyclists themselves.

![Figure:example1](images/56ringringexample1.png)

![Figure:example2](images/56ringringexample2.png)

###Awareness campaigns

Apart from the iPhone and Android mobile phone app, which is the central
enabler of engagement and action, Hogendoorm collects all her research
and resources around the benefits of cycling at the Ring-Ring website in
a blog format. She uses a Facebook and Twitter page to communicate
updates about the development of Ring-Ring, which is still in beta, and
to advocate for more extended use of bicycles, by presenting news items
related to cycling regulation and best practices from other countries.

Hogendoorn aims that her project will become a standard in the
Netherlands and aims to reach about 10% of all cyclists in the country.
At the moment, about 24% of all people cycle to work, making this an
ambitious goal to reach. She is also looking at how Ring-Ring could
expand and remain local at the same time. For example, collective miles
could be distributed according to the user’s postal code and local shops
could use this information to join as well. A larger diversity of
investors would also significantly improve the project and provide
credibility and health insurance companies could join in.

With the main issue addressed by Ring-Ring being to get people out of
their cars and on their bikes, the data collected by the app can show
where people cycle the most and when. These insights can be used to make
these routes faster and safer. Ring-Ring could also be used to visualize
the issue simply by exposing the amount of cycle miles and the routes
people prefer. So Ring-Ring functions primarily as an awareness
campaigning tool for hackable citymaking.

In its efforts to affect legislation it is also advocating for a
different way to look at mobility infrastructure in connection to health
and environment and acts both as a tool for commons resource management
and designing new governance frameworks. The use of the app is
anonymous, so there is no communication between the programmers and the
users, which prevents Ring-Ring from getting feedback from its users.
Other information that finds its way into this project, mostly for
promotional purposes, comes mainly from theoretical research into the
benefits of cycling. According to Hogendoorn, Ring Ring doesn’t use any
open data available but generates its own. She has approached the
government in order to make use of the data they collect to complement
their databases. They feel that, in this way, they can contribute to the
improvement of cyclists’ infrastructure. In order to promote Ring-Ring,
its initiator uses social media and works a lot with local newspapers
and the local community website. She has also actively tried to promote
the project on bigger scale organizations, such as TEDx and the Major’s
Challenge, but for the app promotion, face to face daily communication
with other IJburgers remains the most convincing practice.

She admits that people feel overwhelmed by the information they receive
and the things that require their attention, so the repetition of the
message in as many media as she can manage is key to her communication
tactics. According to Hogendoorn, people really enjoy the playful
approach of the app. One of the main ways of engaging the app’s public
is the collective cycling kilometres. In this case the goal is always
very precise and people are motivated to participate. At the time of the
interview, cyclists were gathering points and funds for a WW2 monument,
and the next collective project was going to be an education project in
the neighborhood park about animals.

##Verbeter de Buurt


Verbeterdebuurt is an online platform and mobile phone app that makes
reporting in the public space more transparent and easy. It allows
citizens to monitor local conditions in their neighborhood, report
problems and propose ideas, which are forwarded to the local
governments. This is done by providing the reporter with more
information about the progress of their report, as well as the
opportunity to rate the handling of the report by the local council.

Reporting a problem in the local municipality can be quite a hassle.
Most districts provide only an e-mail or a phone number with the process
itself being quite complicated, so the design office Creative Crowds
thought there was room for improvement. Verbeter de Buurt started as a
simple Google Maps overlay and soon evolved into an app. Despite initial
resistance from city councils, at the moment 320 out of 416
municipalities in the Netherlands accept the Verbeter de Buurt reports
and about 20 of them have a customized package to streamline these
reports. Verbeter de Buurt is technically licensing their software to
Perfect View, a company that handles the majority of the back end
systems of municipal councils. As several highly sensitive processes go
through these systems, they are very complicated and the team of
Verbeter de Buurt is too small to manage them efficiently. So Perfect
View will make sure that councils do not receive e-mails with reports
but that reports will be automatically incorporated in their regular
workflow. This will be both smoother for the municipal employees and
will allow Verbeter de Buurt to focus on the user experience of the
application. Their main goal is to put forward the ideas instead of the
complaints and motivate the people to get together to realize them.

The organization prides itself on being completely independent and feels
that their way of working can be more valuable on a larger scale as
well. Municipalities should not constantly have to create their
custom-made tools, they should embrace solutions and initiatives that
are already out there.

![Figure:example1](images/57verbeterexample1.PNG)

![Figure:example2](images/57verbeterexample2.PNG)

###Awareness campaigns & designing governance frameworks

Verbeter de Buurt is primarily user oriented and tries to balance
expectations by not making its interface too game-like or exaggerating.
People should not expect to improve the world by using Verbeter de
Buurt, but it should make them feel like they are contributing to their
area’s livelihood and wellbeing. In that sense, it also acts as a
successful campaigning tool for local engagement. The interface should
be friendly, easy to use and attractive, and encourage a personal tone
in the presentation of issues by the users. In the case of Verbeter de
Buurt, the online platform is the main tool of engaging their audience.
They have also developed an iPhone and Android app and they maintain a
blog on the website where they highlight specific ideas that they
consider promising and follow their development. As part of their
community management Verbeter de Buurt also has a Facebook page and
Twitter account.

The nature of most issues reported in Verbeter de Buurt is of very local
interest. As people do not really care about broken street lights even
two streets down the block, there is a lot of effort from the
organization to keep the platform both easily accessible on this highly
local level, yet nationally relevant as well, as areas may share the
same issues and could tackle them collectively. They have tried to
customize the platform for each municipality council according to their
needs, but they eventually feel that a uniform output strengthens the
user trust and allows them to offer better services. There are no plans
of expanding in other countries, but the team actively work to improve
their platform for the Netherlands.

Verbeter de Buurt is a hackable citymaking project because it
practically improves a process traditionally carried out by the
government. It also functions as a campaign motivating people to care
more about their direct environment, both reporting problems and
proposing ideas to improve it. The issues that get reported the most in
Verbeter de Buurt are dog poo and traffic safety but strangely enough
out of the 10 people who visit the website, only 1 is actually reporting
something. The rest just surf around to get informed about what goes on
in their neighborhood. When a report is being filed in through the
platform or the app, it can take two forms: a complaint or an idea. Once
the municipality council receives this report, they have three response
options, they can either mark it as closed when the problem is fixed,
they can reject it if there is not enough information about it, or they
can plan it and provide the information on when the issue has been
scheduled.

When an issue is closed, Verbeter de Buurt contacts the reporter, to
inform them and ask them to confirm that the issue has indeed been
resolved. In this way they can rate the performance of each
municipality, based on how fast and successful they respond to the
reports. Working with this set of data is particularly sensitive, as
city councils compete to erase red spots on their maps, but they also
don’t want to receive bad ratings from external parties, such as
Verbeter de Buurt; this could prompt them to quit working with the
platform instead of improving themselves.

Verbeter de Buurt started with a big viral promotion on Twitter, which
was initially their main communication medium. There is a blog on the
website, but it is primarily meant for announcements and highlighting
issues that they find interesting or that have received wider attention.
Additionally, there is group of avid Verbeter de Buurt-users, who
receive special treatment. They function as advocators for the platform;
many have convinced their local councils to adopt Verbeter de Buurt and
others spread the word to their neighbours. In return Verbeter de Buurt
keeps in good contact with them, sends them press releases, flyers and
other information material. They are also asked to participate in an
annual survey to provide feedback and help improve the platform. The
team behind the platform would really like to change the way authorities
work and make bureaucracy disappear. They also support open
communication and they feel they are contributing to this change. In a
way, they are providing a service to the city authorities by showing
where they fall behind and actively making them more efficient. In
addition, they collect a lot of data that city councils could utilize,
they can provide maps locating the areas with the most problems, which
reports gather widespread interest and even make priority lists for
them.

# Further thoughts

We started this publication with a brief description of the advent of a
platform society: a society in which more and more aspects of our lives
are mediated through digital media platforms. This could have important
repercussions for the way citizens organize themselves socially,
politically as well as spatially. On the one hand the rise of these
platforms brings along a promise (or more precise: a potential) for the
empowerment of citizens, who have all kinds of new tools to organize
themselves around issues they deem of importance. At the same time,
there is also a risk that these platforms will undermine that very
agency, as it could very well be the platform owners that determine the
conditions for social organization, setting limits to certain practices,
while encouraging others. So, we asked, what opportunities, as well as
challenges, does the rise of the platform society pose for an open,
democratic process of collaborative citymaking?

We introduced the concept of Hackable Citymaking as a lens that allows
us to analyse the process we call citymaking in the platform society. In
the first part of this publication we used a number of characteristics
of existing hacker cultures as points of departure to discuss the
challenges and opportunities of digital media in the process of
citymaking. The goal of that exercise was to draw up a list of issues
that deserve critical attention in the debate about the role of digital
media in urban society. The Manifesto, therefore, resulted in eight
Hackable City Research Questions that could serve further academic
research, as well as be used as an agenda for the public debate about
these developments.

In the second part we looked at a number of concrete practices of
hackable citymaking, trying to understand how they employed (amongst
others) digital media. Here the goal was to point out a number of steps
and strategies that citizens, designers and policy makers could use in
setting up their own hackable city project.

Taken together these two exercises have led us to come to a more
schematic understanding of the process of citymaking, as illustrated in
the diagram below:

![Figure:citymaking](images/6citymakingmatrix.png)
&nbsp;
Most instances of hackable citymaking revolve around the organization of
individuals in a collective or a public, usually through or with the aid
of a digital media platform. Individuals contribute resources, such as
knowledge, time, information or money. and at the same time reap some
form of a benefit, be it social, economic or political, on an individual
or communal level. These platforms allow members of a public to discuss
issues, identify with other people or with a common goal, learn from
each other, share resources, ideate and act together. They allow for the
bundling of individual interests into communal goals or action. Or the
other way around: these platforms could provide incentives for
individuals to contribute to collective or even public interest goals,
organizing publics around a commons.

Much of our research so far has been dedicated to the circle on the left
side of the diagram, as we have described seven phases in the hackable
citymaking process while singling out eight strategies that are often
used in hackable citymaking practices.

At the same time, as we have described in our research manifesto, these
collectives or publics do not operate in a social vacuum. They operate
within legal and democratic frameworks, sometimes making use of
resources of the city at large. One of the main research questions
around hackable citymaking is how this relationship between collectives
and institutions can be made interactive. How can the governing and
administrative institutions of the city open up their infrastructures so
that these collectives can improve upon them? How can legal frameworks
or administrative practices be opened up to allow for these collectives
to shape the city? As we have seen in the research manifesto, an
iterative ‘tactical urbanism’ may be an approach for this, in which
collectives start out with a process of small interventions to
demonstrate their viability, hoping to convince institutional actors to
take them on and make them more permanent.

Whereas these collectives can empower a particular group of people to
reach a communal goal, this practice also raises the question of
inclusion and exclusion as well as the democratic justification of these
goals. While we have briefly addressed these issues in our research
manifesto, so far we have given them only limited attention in our
analysis of hackable citymaking practices. This ‘governance’ aspect of
hackable cities should be an important aspect of future research into
this area.

<div class="streams"><hr class="streams" />
Most instances of hackable citymaking revolve around the organization of individuals in a
collective or a public, usually through or with the aid of a digital media platform
<hr class="streams" /></div>

Another core issue in the debate about hackable citymaking lies right in
the centre of the diagram: the collective. How and by whom is this
public organized? Who owns these platforms and sets their conditions?
From what we have learned from our research, there currently is a fuzzy
landscape of citizen initiatives, start-up companies and institutional
pilot projects that take on this role, often with a central role for
designers or architects as central organizers and campaigners, either
from their business practice or in a more difficult to categorize role
as ‘citizen-professionals’.

In future research it’s important to form a better understanding of
these organization models and their business models. After all, hackable
citymaking does not mean that all citizens have to become hackers,
devoting their free time to a higher common good. Neither does it mean
that all amateurs suddenly can become experts in any domain if only they
make use of digital platforms. Hackable citymaking is in need of
economic models to run collectives and incentivize individual
contributions, and these economic models can take many forms, with the
idea of a civic economy as a promising perspective. Likewise, hackable
citymaking is about organizing expertise in a self-learning system, and
again professional experts could play an important role by contributing
their expertise. Not accidentally, many of the projects we have studied
are initiated by, or at least include, design professionals that have
created tools to engage larger audiences around common issues of
concern. Partly motivated by the economic crisis, they have started to
look for other roles and positions, either as small-scale developers, as
in the case of Buiksloterham, or as urban farmers and entrepreneurs,
like Farming the City, or mediators and facilitators in novel civic
processes, like Makers+co and Join the Pipe. Like this, they constitute
a new type of citymakers that contribute to cities that are open and can
be hacked.

In short, for us hackability is a promising lens to explore urban design
practices. It’s not a panacea for all urban evils or social problems. On
the contrary, the practice of hacking the city could be problematic in
itself. Yet it is also a concept that helps us to investigate new
practices of citymaking that could contribute to more resilient,
innovative and liveable cities.

#Reference List

Allwinkle, S., & Cruickshank, P. (2011). Creating smart-er cities: An
overview. *Journal of Urban Technology, 18*(2): 1-16.

Baccarne, B., Mechant, P., Schuurma, D., De Marez, L., & Colpaert, P.
(2014). Urban socio-technical innovations with and by citizens.
*Interdisciplinary Studies Journal. Special Issue on Smart Cities, 3*(4)

Barlow, W. (1988). Community radio in the US: The struggle for a
democratic medium. *Media, Culture & Society, 10*(1): 81-105.

Beck, U. (1992). *Risk society*. Londen: Sage.

Beunderman, J. (2012). *Compendium for the civic economy : What our
cities, towns and neighbourhoods should learn from 25 trailblazers*.
London: Trancity Valiz in association with Nesta.

Bria, F. (2015). *Growing a Digital Social Innovation Ecosystem for
Europe DSI Final Report.* Brussels: European Union.

Castells, M. (2002). The culture of cities in the information age. In
Susser, I, Castells,M. (Ed.), *The castells reader on cities and social
theory*. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers.

Denning, D. E. (1996). Concerning hackers who break into computer
systems. In P. Ludlow (Ed.), *High noon on the electronic frontier:
Conceptual issues in cyberspace*. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Gabrys, J. (2014). Programming environments: Environmentality and
citizen sensing in the smart city. *Environment and Planning D: Society
and Space, 32*(1): 30-48.

Gordon, E., & Manosevitch, E. (2010). Augmented deliberation: Merging
physical and virtual interaction to engage. *New Media & Society, *

Gordon, E., Schirra, S., & Hollander, J. (2011). Immersive planning: A
conceptual model for designing public participation with new
technologies. *Environment and Planning-Part B, 38*(3), 505.

Greenfield, A. (2013). *Against the smart city*. The city is here for you to use Book 1. New York: Do Projects

Hajer, M. (2011). *De energieke samenleving. Op zoek naar een
sturingsfilosofie voor een schone economie.* Den Haag: Planbureau
voor de Leefomgeving.

Hemment, D., & Townsend, A. (2013). *Smart citizens*. FutureEverything
Publications.

Himanen, P. (2001). *The hacker ethic*. New York: Random House.

Hippel, E. v. (2005). *Democratizing innovation*. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

Hollands, R. G. (2008). Will the real smart city please stand up?
intelligent, progressive or entrepreneurial? *City, 12*(3): 303-320.

Kitchin, R. (2013). Big data and human geography: Opportunities,
challenges and risks. *Dialogues in Human Geography, 3*(3): 262-267.

Klooster, I. v. (2013). *Reactivate!: Innovators of dutch architecture*.
New York: Trancity Valiz.

de Lange, M., & de Waal, M. (2013). Owning the city: New media and
citizen engagement in urban design. *First Monday, 18*(11)

Leadbeater, C., & Miller, P. (2004). *The pro-am revolution: How
enthusiasts are changing our society and economy*. London: Demos.

Levy, S. (2001). *Hackers: Heroes of the computer revolution* Penguin
Books New York.

Lydon, M., & Garcia, A. (2015). *Tactical urbanism : Short-term action
for long-term change*. Washington DC: Island Press.

Ratti, C., & Townsend, A. (2011). The social nexus. *Scientific
American, 305*(3): 42-48.

Raymond, E. (1999). The cathedral and the bazaar. *Knowledge, Technology
& Policy, 12*(3), 23-49.

Roszak, T. (1986). *The cult of information: The folklore of computers
and the true art of thinking*. New York: Pantheon Books.

Söderström, O., Paasche, T., & Klauser, F. (2014). Smart cities as
corporate storytelling. *City, 18*(3): 307-320.

Tonkens, E., Trappenburg, M., Hurenkamp, M., & Schmidt, J. (2015). *Montessori
democratie : Spanning tussen burgerparticipatie en de lokale politiek*.
Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.

Townsend, A. M. (2013). *Smart cities: Big data, civic hackers, and the
quest for a new utopia*. New York: WW Norton & Company.

Turner, F. (2006). How digital technology found utopian ideology. In D.
Silver, & A. Massanari (Eds.), *Critical cyberculture studies: Current
terrains, future directions*. New York: NYU Press.

Wark, M. (2004). A hacker manifesto. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

